1817
Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers. All Rights Reserved.
Version 1.0 - 5 March 2012

Table of Contents
1 Introduction...................................................1
1.1 Short Selling............................................1
1.2 Game Components...................................1
1.2.1 Map.............................................................1
1.2.2 Stock Market...............................................1
1.2.3 Current Round Marker................................1
1.2.4 New York Stock Exchange.........................2
1.2.5 Bank of New York......................................2
1.2.6 Private Companies......................................2
1.2.7 Public Companies.......................................3
1.2.8 Track Tiles..................................................3
1.2.9 Trains..........................................................3
1.2.10 Money.......................................................3

2
3
4

5

1.3 How to Win.............................................4
1.4 Player Etiquette........................................4
Game Phases..................................................4
General Sequence of Play..............................5
Setup and Start of the Game.........................5
4.1 Setting up the Game.................................5
4.2 Conducting the Initial Auction.................5
Stock Round..................................................6
5.1 Certificate and Share Limit......................6
5.2 Selling Stock............................................6
5.2.1 Resigning as President................................6

5.3 Selling Stock Short..................................7
5.4 Buying Stock...........................................7
5.4.1 Change of President....................................7

5.5 New Company IPO..................................7
5.6 Acting on a Company's Behalf.................8
5.7 Ending the Stock Round..........................8
6 Operating Rounds.........................................8
6.1 Overview.................................................8
6.2 Operating Order.......................................9
6.3 Lay or Upgrade Track..............................9
6.3.1 Laying Yellow Track..................................9
6.3.2 Upgrading Track.........................................9

6.4 Place Station Marker................................9
6.5 Run Trains...............................................9

6.6 Pay / Half Pay / Withhold Dividend.......10
6.7 Buy Trains.............................................10
6.8 Pay Loan Interest...................................10
6.9 Repay Loans..........................................11
6.10 Check for Liquidation..........................11
6.11 End of the Operating Round.................11
7 Merger and Acquisition Rounds.................11
7.1 Converting and Merging........................11
7.1.1
7.1.2
7.1.3
7.1.4

Conversion................................................11
2-Share Merger.........................................12
5-Share Merger.........................................12
Post Conversion/Merger Process..............12

7.2 Company Sales......................................12
7.2.1
7.2.2
7.2.3
7.2.4

Liquidations..............................................12
Acquisitions..............................................13
Friendly Sales............................................13
Sales Process.............................................13

7.3 Acquired Station Markers......................14
7.4 Cash Crisis.............................................14
7.5 End of Merger Round............................15
8 End of the Game..........................................15
9 Variants........................................................15
9.1 Increased Short Sales.............................15
9.2 More Players..........................................15
9.3 Short Squeeze........................................16
9.4 Modern Trains.......................................16
10 Conflicts and Errata..................................16
11 Appendices.................................................16
11.1 Strategy Tips........................................16
11.1.1
11.1.2
11.1.3
11.1.4

General Guidelines.................................16
Private Companies..................................17
Initial Companies and Loans...................17
Short Selling...........................................18

11.2 Design & Historical Notes...................19
11.2.1 Company Histories..................................20

12 Acknowledgments / Credits / Notices........22
13 Train Manifest / Phase Chart....................23
14 Tile Manifest and Upgrade Table.............23

1817

Page 1

1 Introduction

Bank of New York, with interest rate marker and 70
unlabeled loan markers [1.2.5]

Cross-references within the rules are denoted by square
brackets – [2.2] refers the reader to section 2.2 for
additional information about the topic under discussion.

11 Private Companies [1.2.6], including a total of 6
coal mine tokens, 3 bridge tokens, and a special yellow tile for Pittsburgh

1817 is a railroad operations and share trading board
game in the 18xx series (originated by Francis Tresham
with 1829) with a distinct financial flavor. It is named
after the year the New York Stock Exchange opened at
40 Wall Street in New York. Three to seven players represent investors in railway companies, spending their
initial capital to buy wholly owned private companies
and 2-share companies, and later shares in larger 5-share
and 10-share companies. Each company is controlled by
its largest shareholder, called the President. Company
revenue can be paid out as dividends to shareholders or
retained to fund further track and rolling stock. The value of shares will rise and fall in relation to the fortunes
of the company.

20 Public Companies [1.2.7], each with a charter, 8
station markers, 1 stock marker, 1 revenue marker, a
5/10-share marker, a president's certificate, and 18
other share certificates (28 if variant components
were purchased [9.1])

1817 is a fairly long game. Experienced, brisk players
can expect to take about six hours to complete a game.
Novices or more deliberate players might add several
hours to that time.

You will need to provide a Bank, which may be poker
chips or play money (optional component). The amount
of money in the Bank is unlimited, but $12,000 should
be enough for most games.

Information about assets owned by a player or company
is public knowledge. Personal and company assets
should be laid out in plain view and must be disclosed
upon request.

1.2.1 Map

1.1 Short Selling
A key feature of 1817 is the ability to sell stock short,
which is the practice of selling stock that is not owned,
with the intention of buying the stock back at a later
date. The short seller hopes to profit from a decline in
the price of the stock between the sale and the repurchase, as he will pay less to buy the stock than he
received on selling it.

166 track tiles (but considered unlimited), in yellow,
green, brown and gray [1.2.8]
36 train cards (2-trains have permanent trains on the
reverse side) [1.2.9]
One priority deal card, and 7 player number cards
These rules

The map shows the Northeast USA from Chicago to
New York and Canada to Atlanta. Superimposed on the
map is a hex grid on which hexagonal track tiles are laid.
Large circles represent cities (Toronto is also a city, but
a station marker may not be placed there). Destinations
beyond the edge of the map are represented by red “OffMap” areas. The map is surrounded by red Off-Map
areas, shaded non-buildable areas, and the Atlantic
Ocean.

1.2.2 Stock Market

You can think of a short share as a negative share, or a
promise to provide the share in the future. In 1817, there
is no requirement to close the short position (by buying a
share) during the game, but while you own a short share,
it is a liability – you must pay to the bank any dividends
the company pays. See [6.6] for more details.

The stock market governs the value of shares in companies. It is represented by a row of columns. Each box
represents the value or financial status of the company.
The company can be in liquidation, in acquisition, or
valued from $40 to $600 per share. Shares of a company
in the liquidation or acquisition section of the stock market are considered illiquid and cannot be bought or sold.

1.2 Game Components

1.2.3 Current Round Marker

The game comes with the following components:

The round marker keeps track of when the game is in a
stock round, operating round, or merger and acquisition
round. It also serves as a reminder to set the loan fee and
to export a train at the appropriate time.

Map [1.2.1] / Stock Market [1.2.2] / Current Round
Marker [1.2.3]
New York Stock Exchange [1.2.4]

Version 1.0

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 2

1.2.4 New York Stock Exchange
The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) is where shares
are placed when sold by players. The Open Market represents shares held by the public. Once a share is sold
short in a company, the remaining available short certificates and their matching share certificate are put in the
Open Short Interest section of the NYSE.

1.2.5 Bank of New York
The Bank of New York makes loans available to public
companies in $100 increments. Companies may take
loans for any purpose at times specified in the stock
round, the operating round and the merger and acquisition round. The president of a company provides a
personal guarantee for the company’s loans.
The Bank of New York charter tracks the number of
loans taken by all companies and the current loan fee. At
the start of the game, place 70 loan markers in each of
the circles and the interest rate marker in the $5 space.
When a loan is taken by a company, remove a loan marker from the top-most row of loans and place it on the
company charter along with $100 from the bank. Move
the company’s stock price one space to the left if it is not
already in the left most gray acquisition space on the
stock market. When a company repays a loan, return the
loan marker from the company onto the lowest valued
empty circle and pay $100 from the company to the
bank. Move the company’s stock price one space to the
right if it is not already on the $600 stock space. Loans
can only be paid back at the specified time during the
company's operating turn or after a company has been
acquired or liquidated.
The loan fee is set at the start of each operating round by
placing the interest rate marker in the Interest column to
the left of the highest row on the Bank of New York that
is missing a loan. If no loans are missing, the interest
rate is set at $5. The interest rate remains in effect until it
is reset at the start of the next operating round regardless
of how many loans are taken or repaid.
The number of loans a company may acquire is limited
by its share size, as indicated on the charter: a 2-share
company may not exceed 2 loans, a 5-share company
may not exceed 5 loans, and a 10-share company may
not exceed 10 loans. The total number of loans available
is limited to the 70 loans on the Bank of New York.

1.2.6 Private Companies

new public companies and may not be resold. Private
companies may be acquired in mergers, liquidations, or
takeovers. Private companies remain open the entire
game. Players may find it convenient to reduce clutter by
removing a private company from the game once it is no
longer able to do anything.
The game includes eleven private companies which are
as follows:
Name
Pittsburgh Steel Mill
Mountain Engineers
Ohio Bridge Co
Union Bridge Co
Train Station
Minor Coal Mine
Coal Mine
Major Coal Mine
Minor Mail Contract
Mail Contract
Major Mail Contract

Face Value
$40
$40
$40
$80
$80
$30
$60
$90
$60
$90
$120

Pittsburgh Steel Mill has a face value of $40. The Pittsburgh Steel Mill allows the owning company to place the
special Pittsburgh yellow tile during the tile laying phase
of its operating turn. This counts as a yellow tile lay.
There is no connectivity requirement to lay this tile. The
Pittsburgh hex is not reserved and any company with a
route to Pittsburgh (or that starts there) may place a regular yellow city tile on the Pittsburgh hex – in that case,
later upgrades follow the normal path.
Mountain Engineers has a face value of $40. It earns $20
for the owning public company every time the owning
company lays a yellow tile in a mountain hex. The company must first pay any applicable fee for placing the tile
prior to collecting the $20.
Ohio and Union Bridge Companies have a face value of
$40 and $80 respectively. The Ohio Bridge Company
comes with one bridge token; the Union Bridge Company comes with two bridge tokens. A bridge company
allows the owning company to place a yellow tile on river hexes without paying the usual $10 fee. The owning
company may place one or both bridge tokens at any
time during its operating turn. A bridge token may be
placed on Louisville, Cincinnati, or Charleston provided
the city does not already have a bridge token. Placing the
token is optional and has no connectivity requirement.
The token is placed on the hex, but does not occupy a
station marker location. Once placed, the token increases
the value of the city by $10 for all trains (from any company) running to the city.

Private companies are sold to players during the initial
subsidy auction. Private companies are then used to fund
Version 1.0

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 3
Train Station has a face value of $80. This provides an
additional station marker for the owning company. When
the train station is acquired by a Company, place a station marker on the company charter.
Coal Mine Companies (Minor, Regular, Major) have a
face value of $30 (minor), $60 (regular), and $90
(major). The coal mine companies come with either one
(minor), two (regular), or three (major) coal mine tokens.
When the owning company lays yellow track tile in any
mountain hex adjacent to a city or red off-board location,
it may also place one of its coal mine tokens. If it does
so, it does not pay the usual $15 mountain tile fee. The
yellow tile underlying the coal mine may not be upgraded. Coal mines must directly connect to a city or red offboard location, or be placed adjacent to a city such that if
the adjacent city were sufficiently upgraded, it could
directly connect to the coal mine. The coal mine increases the value of any company's route through the hex by
$10. Any company may use the coal mine. Train routes
may not start or end at a coal mine.
Mail Contracts (Minor, Regular, Major) have a face value of $60 (minor), $90 (regular), and $120 (major). A
mail contract pays the owning company $10 (minor),
$15 (regular), or $20 (major) at the beginning of every
operating round provided the owning company has one
or more trains.

1.2.7 Public Companies
There are twenty Public Companies, each with a Charter,
10 tokens, and 19 share certificates (a president's certificate, 13 share certificates, and 5 short share certificates;
as an optional component, additional shares are available
for use with variant [9.1]).
A company may be reused after a company is removed
from play, which may happen due to a merger, liquidation, or acquisition.
Public Companies may be 2, 5, or 10-share companies,
and is always marked accordingly in the top-right of the
charter. The choice is made when the new company IPO
occurs [5.5] subject to the restrictions of the current
phase [2], and may be changed by mergers and conversions [7]. A company is never required to convert or
merge; a company may end the game as a 2-share company.
Ten tokens are provided for each company. One token is
used to mark the stock price on the stock market, and
another for the revenue chart. The remaining eight are
available for the company to use as station markers.

Version 1.0

Barring a takeover, acquisition, or ownership of the
Train Station private company, the basic number of station markers a company will have is listed in the
following table. Companies also start with this number
of station markers after an IPO:
Company Size
2-share
5-share
10-share

Starting /
Basic Station Markers
1 station marker
2 station markers
4 station markers

Companies purchase the extra station markers when converting to larger companies (even if they already have
the required number of station markers through other
means). Companies can also acquire station markers
through mergers and acquisitions.

1.2.8 Track Tiles
1817 was designed with the intent that the game does not
run short of tiles; there is considered to be an unlimited
number of each type of tile. The provided tiles should be
enough for most games. If there is a shortage of tiles,
players should come up with a substitute.

1.2.9 Trains
There is considered to be an unlimited number of 2trains available for purchase during the first operating
round of the game. The provided 2-trains should be sufficient for most games; if there is a shortage of 2-trains,
use a substitute. After exporting a 2-train at the end of
the first operating round, all the remaining unsold 2trains are removed from play and 2+-trains become
available.
Train
2-Train
2+-Train
3-Train
4-Train
5-Train
6-Train
7-Train
8-Train

Cost
$100
$100
$250
$400
$600
$750
$900
$1100

Quantity
Unlimited*
4**
12
8
5
4
3
Unlimited

* Available first operating round only
** Runs one operating turn after 4-train purchased

1.2.10 Money
1817 was designed with the intent that the Bank does not
run out of money. The amount of money in the Bank is
unlimited, but $12,000 should be enough for most
games. If that runs out, add more as necessary.

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 4

1.3 How to Win
Players win by having the highest net worth (comprised
of cash and owned stock, less short stock) at the end of
the game [8]. Company-owned assets—such as Company cash and trains—do not contribute to net worth.

Phase 3 starts on the purchase of the first 3-Train. During Phase 3:
Yellow and green track is available
Red off-board areas and pre-printed grey hexes
count the second value

1.4 Player Etiquette

Companies may own no more than 4 trains

Players should attempt to speed play as much as possible. In particular, players should try to determine what
share to buy or what tile to place or upgrade during
another player’s turn.

New companies may only be started as 2-share or 5share companies

Player cash and Certificates owned should be arranged
neatly in front of the player. Company cash should be
placed in the Treasury section of the Company Charter,
and the Company’s trains should be neatly displayed in
the train section of the Company Charter.

Phase 4 starts on the purchase of the first 4-train. At the
start of phase 4, 2-trains become obsolete and are eliminated without compensation. (The 2-trains have
permanent trains on the reverse side, so don't put them
away.) During phase 4:
Yellow and green track is available

Upon request, a player must disclose his cash or Certificate holdings, or the assets of any Company under his
control.

Red off-board areas and pre-printed grey hexes
count the second value

Corporate transactions are public knowledge, whether
conducted between a Company and the Bank, a Company and a player, or two Companies.

New companies may only be started as 5-share companies

Players may engage in public, verbal discussions and
enter into public, verbal agreements. Such discussions
should be reasonably brief in order to speed play. Performance is not enforceable except by moral suasion; a
player who has performed an action under such an agreement in the anticipation of future action by his partner
has no other recourse if his partner reneges on the agreement. Secret discussions or agreements, whether verbal
or written, are prohibited.

2+-trains may not be bought or sold, and are discarded without compensation at the end of the owning
company’s "Run Trains" step [6.5]
Phase 5 starts on the purchase of the first 5-train. During
phase 5:
Yellow, green, and brown track is available
Red off-board areas and pre-printed grey hexes
count the third value
Companies may own no more than 3 trains

2 Game Phases
1817 proceeds through a series of Phases, which affect
which tiles may be played, the value of the red off-board
areas and pre-printed grey hexes, which trains are available to be bought or rusted, and how many trains may be
owned by a Company. Each Phase lasts until the Triggering Event for the next Phase.
The game starts in Phase 2. During Phase 2:
Yellow track is available
Red off-board areas and pre-printed grey hexes
count the lowest value
Companies may own no more than 4 trains
New companies may only be started as 2-share companies
Version 1.0

Companies may own no more than 3 trains

New companies may only be started as 5-share or
10-share companies
Phase 6 starts on the purchase of the first 6-train. At the
start of phase 6, 3-trains become obsolete and are eliminated without compensation. During phase 6:
Yellow, green, and brown track is available
Red off-board areas and pre-printed grey hexes
count the third value
Companies may own no more than 2 trains
New companies may only be started as 10-share
companies
Phase 7 starts on the purchase of the first 7-train. During
phase 7:

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 5
Yellow, green, brown, and gray track is available

4 Setup and Start of the Game

Red off-board areas and pre-printed grey hexes
count the highest value

4.1 Setting up the Game

Companies may own no more than 2 trains

Companies may own no more than 2 trains

Lay out the map, stock market, and Bank of New York.
Sort each company's stock certificates with the President's Certificate on top, and its tokens nearby. Stack the
trains in order. At the start of the game, only the yellow
track tiles will be used but other tiles should be available
for inspection. Place the Round Marker on the roundel
space marked “Stock Round”. Each player should have
enough room for several company charters, stock certificates, and a pile of money. Some players will find
writing materials and a calculator useful. Determine the
seating order and the starting player at random or by
mutual agreement. Give the starting player the priority
deal card.

New companies may only be started as 10-share
companies

The starting money of $1260 is equally divided between
the players as shown in the table below:

New companies may only be started as 10-share
companies
Phase 8 starts on the purchase of the first 8-train. At the
start of phase 8, 4-trains become obsolete and are eliminated without compensation. During phase 8:
Yellow, green, brown, and gray track is available
Red off-board areas and pre-printed grey hexes
count the highest value

Short selling is no longer permitted, although there
is still no requirement to close short positions
There are an unlimited number of 8-trains

3 General Sequence of Play
The game starts in Phase 2, reflecting the fact that the
first train available for sale in the bank is a type 2. As
further trains are bought, new phases start with each new
type of train [2, 6.7]. The game ends in phase 8 (see [8]
for details).

Number of
Players
3
4
5
6
7

Starting
Cash
$420
$315
$252
$210
$180

Certificate
Limit
21
16
13
11
9

Private companies are laid out face up in the middle of
the board along with the starting seed money of $200.

4.2 Conducting the Initial Auction

After an Initial Auction Round [4.2], the game progresses through a series of rounds, repeating until the end of
the game: a Stock Round [5], an Operating Round [6], a
Merger/Acquisition Round [7], a second Operating
Round, and a second Merger/Acquisition Round.

Before the first stock round, a special Private Company
auction is held. The private companies are laid out in a
central location along with $200 in seed money from the
Bank. The seed money is used to subsidize the purchase
of private companies.

During stock rounds, players start new companies, and
buy and sell shares (including short sales, [1.1, 5.3]) in
public companies. During operating rounds, companies
lay track, place station markers, operate trains to earn
revenue, and purchase more trains. During the
merger/acquisition rounds, companies may change their
share structure to 5-share or 10-share companies and
may also merge or acquire other companies.

The player with the priority deal card may now put a
company up for auction or pass. When a private company is put up for auction, the initial bid combined with the
available seed money must be a multiple of $5 that is at
least equal to the face value of the private company. No
bid may be negative or exceed the face value of the private company. Bidding continues around the table with
players bidding increasing amounts evenly divisible by
$5. Once a player passes, he may not bid again on the
same private company. The auction is over once all players but one have passed.

An important part of 1817 is determining your company’s financial structure. Companies may take on debt
in the form of $100 loans in order to improve profitability. The fee on loans is reset at the start of each operating
round. This fee must be paid during the company’s operating turn.

Version 1.0

The winning bidder now pays the bank his bid and takes
the private company. Funds from the seed money are
paid to the bank to make up the difference between the
winning bid and the face value of the private company.

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 6

Play proceeds to the left of the player that started the
auction.
The initial stock round ends when all players pass consecutively. Give the priority deal card to the player to the
left of the last player to initiate a Private Company auction. The game now continues with a normal stock
round. All unsold private companies are removed from
the game. Any remaining seed money is returned to the
bank.

5 Stock Round
A stock round consists of a series of turns, starting with
the holder of the priority deal card and proceeding clockwise. On each turn, the active player may act either for
himself or for one of his companies (which must not be
in the red liquidation or the gray acquisition areas of the
stock market) [5.6].
If acting for himself, he may perform any or all of the
following actions in this order:
1) Sell any number of share certificates [5.2]
2) Sell short one share certificate [5.3]
3) Buy one share certificate [5.4] or start a new
company [5.5]
If a player acts for one of his companies, the company
must take one or both of the following actions in this
order:
1) Take one or more loans up to the maximum
allowed for the company.
2) Purchase one or more shares of the company’s
own stock from the open market.
A player doing none of these things is deemed to pass.
The stock round ends only when all players pass consecutively. Thus, a player selling, shorting, buying, or acting
for his company is guaranteed another turn in the current
round.

In order to buy a certificate, a player must hold fewer
certificates than the limit. Thus, in a four-player game, a
player holding 16 certificates must sell shares in order to
make room to buy alternatives. A player may close a
short position by purchasing a matching share of stock
even if he is at or above the certificate limit.
Any time a player finds himself with both a regular share
and a short share of the same stock, he must immediately
close the short position by returning the matching pair to
the open short interest section of the open market. This
can happen after purchasing a share of stock or after a
merger.
Players are limited to owning six shares in a 10-share
company, three shares in a 5-share company, and two
shares in a 2-share company.
A player can be temporarily caused to be above the cer tificate limit by losing a presidency or due to two 5-share
companies merging. If a player finds himself in excess
of the certificate limit during his turn in a stock round,
he must, if possible, sell shares in excess of the limit prior to ending his turn. A player may never end his turn
during a stock round in excess of the certificate limit,
unless all certificates held are IPO shares that cannot be
sold.

5.2 Selling Stock
To sell stock, the player transfers any number of share
certificates from his holdings into the Open Market, subject to the following constraints:
Private companies may not be sold to the bank
Shares of a 2-share company may not be sold
Shares in a company may not be sold during the
stock round the company formed due to an IPO
The President’s certificate may never end up in the
Open Market
Shares in a company whose share price is in one of
the gray acquisition areas on the stock market may
not be sold

All stock transfers in the stock round are done between a
player and the open market, a player and a company, or a
company and the open market. Players may never buy
stock directly from another player. Companies may only
have their own stock in their treasury.

The player receives the current share price for each share
sold from the bank. Selling stock, even by the President,
does not change the current share price.

5.1 Certificate and Share Limit

5.2.1 Resigning as President

A player may hold a limited number of certificates [4.1].
Only public company shares count against the certificate
limit. Private companies and short share certificates do
not count against this limit.

If, as a result of selling shares, the holding of a Company
President drops below that of another player who owns
at least two shares of the Company, that other player
becomes the new President. If there is more than one eli-

Version 1.0

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 7
gible player, the new President is the player with the
largest holding, or, in the case of a tie, the tying player
closest to the outgoing President’s left. The outgoing
President exchanges his President’s Certificate for two
ordinary certificates of the affected company belonging
to the new President. The exchange is affected before
resolving the rest of the sale (which may include selling
only one of the two shares received).

5.3 Selling Stock Short
A player may sell short one share of stock in a 5-share or
10-share company subject to the following constraints:
Shares of a 2-Share company may not be sold short
No share may be sold short if there are already 5 or
more short shares in play (but see variant [9.1])
Shares in a company may not be sold short in the
same stock round that the company formed due to an
IPO
You may not sell short shares if you own any shares
in the company, including the President’s certificate
Shares in a company whose share price is in one of
the gray acquisition spaces on the stock market may
not be sold short
Short selling is prohibited during phase 8, which is
triggered by the sale or export of an 8-train
If the company has not yet been sold short, move five
short shares and regular shares to the Open Short Interest
section of the NYSE. To sell short, the player takes a
Share and a Short Share from the NYSE Open Short
Interest. The player then sells the share just as he would
a regular share while retaining the short share. The player receives the current share price for the share sold short
from the bank. There is no limit to the number of short
shares an individual may have. Selling short stock does
not cause the current share price to change.
The act of short selling is considered a sale, and prevents
the player from purchasing this stock for the remainder
of the stock round.

5.4 Buying Stock
To buy stock, the player whose turn it is transfers one
certificate from the company treasury or the Open Market into his own holdings. The President’s certificate of
the company must be owned by a player, the player must
adhere to the certificate and share limits defined in section [4.1], and the player may not have sold stock in that
company earlier in the same Stock Round. Only one certificate may be bought per Stock turn. Shares in a
Version 1.0

company whose share price is in one of the gray acquisition spaces on the stock market may not be bought.
If the certificate comes from the company treasury then
its price is paid to the company. If the certificate comes
from the Open Market then its price is paid to the Bank.
In all cases the price for certificate is the current share
price. Buying stock does not cause the current share
price to change.

5.4.1 Change of President
If, as a result of a share purchase, the player’s holdings
exceed that of the current President, he becomes the new
President and must exchange the President’s Certificate
for two shares of his own.

5.5 New Company IPO
Instead of buying a certificate, a player may start a new
company IPO. The player selects a company that is currently not in play and places a station marker from that
company on the board in any available open location
except Toronto. A new company IPO may not occur if
there are no open city locations to place a starting station
marker or if there are no available company charters.
The President’s certificate for this company is then auctioned. The current player starts the bidding at a multiple
of $5 between $100 and $400 inclusive. Going around
the table starting at the left of the current player, each
player may raise the bid to any multiple of $5 above the
current bid not to exceed $400, or pass. A player may not
bid an amount he cannot pay. Once a player passes, he
may not bid any further in the same auction. When only
one player is left in the bidding, he wins the auction.
The share price is the winning bid, divided by two, and
rounded down to the nearest stock price. The company’s
stock marker is now placed at this location on the stock
market. The winning player declares if this president’s
share is for a 2-share, 5-share, or 10-share company as
permitted by the current phase of the game. The company is now considered funded and operational. The
winning bid is placed on the company charter and winning bidder takes the President’s certificate. Private
companies held by the player may be used in lieu of cash
for partial or full payment of the winning bid. The face
value of the private company must be used. The player
must contribute equity (cash + private company values)
that exactly total the winning bid. If more shares are
available to purchase, they are placed on the company
charter.
New companies receive the initial station marker placed
on the map for free. 5-share companies must purchase 1

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 8

additional station marker for $50, and 10-share companies must purchase 3 additional station markers for $150.

6 Operating Rounds

Payment for these station markers must be made prior to
the end of the stock round. Paying for these station markers is not an action. Companies may take loans to pay for
the initial station markers. Taking loans must be a company action. If the stock round ends without the
company purchasing the required station markers, the
company is placed in liquidation.

Prior to the start of each Operating Round the loan fee is
set on the Bank of New York charter. Instructions on
how to do this are in section [1.2.5] “Bank of New
York”.

After the IPO is concluded, play proceeds to the left of
the player that started the IPO auction, regardless of who
won the auction.

During an Operating Round each Company in the green
or gray area of the stock market may:

Mail contracts are paid to companies that own a mail
contract and one or more trains at the start of the operating round before any company takes its operating turn.

Lay one or two track tiles (one may be an upgrade)

5.6 Acting on a Company's Behalf
If a player decides to act on behalf of a company instead
of taking action himself, he must perform one or both of
the following actions in this order for any one company
for which he is president and whose share price is not in
the red liquidation or gray acquisition areas of the stock
market:
1) Take one or more loans up to the maximum
allowed for the company, as described in [1.2.5].
(Reminder: interest is due each operating round,
but not during the stock round.)
2) Purchase one or more shares of the company’s own
stock from the open market, up to the amount
available, by paying the bank for the stock
purchase.

5.7 Ending the Stock Round
The stock round ends when all players pass consecutively. Give the priority deal marker to the player to the left
of the last player to take an action, for himself or one of
his companies in the stock round. Advance the roundel
marker.
Examine the price of each stock in operating order. If
100% or more of a 5-share or 10-share company’s stock
is held by players, the stock price moves one space to the
right, unless the value of the stock is already at $600, in
which case it does not move. Note that it is possible for
players to own 100% or more of a 5-share or 10-share
company while stock is in the open market or the company charter due to short selling. The stock price is then
moved one space to the left for each share in the open
market. The stock price may not move left further than
the left most gray space on the stock market. If the stock
price reaches this location, it stops moving.

Version 1.0

Place a station marker
Run trains
Pay full, pay half, or withhold dividends
Buy trains
Pay fees on loans
Repay loans
Companies on the red liquidation space do not operate.

6.1 Overview
Companies may take loans at any time (as described in
[1.2.5]) during their operating turn before or during the
“pay fees on loans” step or after the “repay loans” step.
Companies may not take loans between these two steps.
Loans may only be repaid at the designated time. Move
the stock price left one space at the time each loan is taken unless the stock price is already in the left most gray
area of the stock market, in which case it does not move.
Move the stock price one space to right for each loan
paid off, unless the stock price is $600, in which case the
stock price does not move.
A route of a company consists of a continuous
unbranched length of track, including on it a city containing a station marker belonging to the company (not
necessarily at the beginning or end of the route). It may
not pass through a city completely blocked by the station
markers of other companies. It may not visit any city or
red off-board area more than once; the two groups of city
circles in New York are part of the same city and a route
may not visit both. A route may not use any track segment more than once; note that the junction in the middle
of brown plain track tiles is not considered part of any
track segment.

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 9

6.2 Operating Order

6.3.2 Upgrading Track

Companies operate in descending order of share price. If
the stock values of two or more companies are equal,
then the one whose stock marker was placed in that
space first operates first. In order to help indicate which
stock marker was placed first, whenever a stock marker
is moved on the Stock Market, it should be placed lowest
in that value column.

When upgrading track, the old tile is removed and the
new substituted. Green tiles may be used to replace yellow, brown to replace green, and gray to replace brown.
Plain track, normal city, “B” and the “NY” city tiles
must be replaced with corresponding tiles. Track segments on the old tile must be represented, in the same
orientations, on the new. See [14] for examples.

6.3 Lay or Upgrade Track

Some part of the track (not necessarily a new part) on the
new tile must be part of a route of the company. If the
tile has one or more Station Markers on it, these are
replaced on the new tile in the same position as before.
There is no charge for upgrading track in difficult terrain
except for Detroit and New York; those cities cost $20
to upgrade to a green tile.

The active Company may, per Operating turn, lay a yellow tile or upgrade one yellow, green, or brown tile to
green, brown, or gray respectively when available. For
an additional fee of $20, a Company may perform a second tile operation; at most one of the two operations may
be an upgrade. Also, a Company may not lay a yellow
tile and upgrade it during the same turn. Companies may
not perform three tile operations in the same operating
turn.
Green tiles are available from Phase 3, brown from
Phase 5, and gray from Phase 7.
The board already contains a number of yellow and gray
hexes on which track is printed. These hexes should be
treated as though a tile of the same color as the background of the hex has been placed there already; yellow
tiles may not be laid there, but the yellow hexes may be
upgraded.
The supplied quantity of track is intended to be sufficient for most games; if it runs out a substitute should be
used.

6.3.1 Laying Yellow Track
When a yellow tile is laid, it must be placed on and
aligned with one of the pale green hexes on the map.
While there is no track in the Company’s home hex, the
Company may lay any suitable city tile there. Otherwise,
the track on the tile must form part of a route of the
Company.
Track laid may not run off the hex grid, into the blank
side of a red or gray hex, or into impassible water
(denoted by a thick blue line).
If the hex is labeled with a sum of money, representing
difficult terrain, the Company must immediately pay that
sum to the Bank unless that cost is defrayed by a Private
Company. If the map hex is marked with a large open
circle, representing a large city, then so must the tile.
If the map hex does not contain an open city circle, then
plain track (i.e. track without a station) must be used.
Version 1.0

When upgrading normal cities to brown, players must
use tiles with as many exits as will fit.
Tiles with a Coal Mine may not be upgraded.

6.4 Place Station Marker
A Company may place an additional station marker, if it
has one available, in any open city circle to which it has
a legal route on a hex in which it does not already have a
station marker. Placing the station marker is free; each
Company pays for station markers at the time they are
acquired. A station marker may not be placed in Toronto.

6.5 Run Trains
A Company that owns one or more trains now operates
them and calculates the resulting earnings. A Company
must calculate the maximum possible earnings (not necessarily the maximum possible dividend for any
particular train if more than one train is owned).
Earnings are calculated as follows:
Each train must operate on a legal train route, which
is a route where both ends terminate at a City or OffMap Location. A train's route may not start or end at
a Coal Mine.
The maximum number of Cities and Off-Map Locations that may be included in the route is the train
number. Coal mines do not count against the train
number.
All Cities, Coal Mines, and Off-Map Locations
included in the route count for revenue.
Off-Map Locations must be at the ends of a train’s
route. A train may begin and end its route at two dif-

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 10

ferent Off-Map Locations, provided the route is otherwise legal.

Here are the payments to the company treasury and
shareholders under each possible scenario:

Trains may not use track segments used by any of
the Company’s other trains in the same operating
turn. Trains may, however, visit Cities or Off-Map
Locations visited by other trains.

2-Share
5-Share
10-Share
Company
Company
Company
Treas. Owner Treas. Share Treas. Share
Full
$0
$190
$0
$38
$0
$19
Half
$95
$95
$95
$19
$90 $10
Withhold $190
$0
$190
$0
$190 $0

The route value is equal to the sum of the values of
all Cities, Coal Mines, and Off-Map Locations
included in the route. The Company earnings are
equal to the sum of the value of all the Company’s
train routes.

6.6 Pay / Half Pay / Withhold Dividend
Companies may pay full, pay half, or withhold dividends. The portion of the dividend paid out is divided
among shareholders. This is paid from the bank to the
player when a player owns shares or to the company for
shares in the company treasury; dividends for shares in
the open market are retained by the bank.
If the total dividend paid to stock holders is greater than
or equal to the stock price, the share moves one space to
the right. The share moves two spaces to the right if the
total dividend paid to stock holders is greater than or
equal to double the stock price. The gray acquisition area
is considered $40 for calculating stock movement when
paying a dividend. Paying a dividend of $40 to $75 when
in the gray acquisition area will move the stock marker
one space to the right. Paying a dividend of $80 or
greater when in the gray acquisition area will move the
stock marker two spaces to the right. If the total dividend
paid to stock holders is zero, the share moves one space
to the left. If the total dividend is above zero, but below
the stock price, the share price does not change.
When moving the share price, it may never move right of
the $600 stock value space, or left of the left most gray
acquisition space.
Players that have sold short a company that declares a
dividend must match the dividend payment paid to shareholders on a per share basis by paying that amount to the
bank. If a player is unable to make this payment with
cash on hand, follow the “Cash Crisis” instructions in
section [7.4].
When a 10-share company pays a half dividend, it
rounds the half paid to shareholders up to the nearest $10
and the half retained down to the nearest $10.
The following table provides an example for a company
that earned $190 running trains. 2-Share companies only
have a single shareholder with the President’s certificate.

Version 1.0

6.7 Buy Trains
If a company is below the current train limit, it may buy
one or more trains, from the Bank or from another Public
Company with the consent of its President. In a single
turn, it may buy several trains, as long as it has room and
the money, but any phase changes caused by the purchase of one train take effect before the next is bought.
New trains are purchased from the Bank in the order
they appear at the top of the train stack. Trains in the
Open Market may also be purchased from the Bank at
face value.
To purchase a train from the Bank, the company must
pay the purchase price of the train it wishes to buy to the
Bank from its Treasury. To purchase a train from another
Public Company not in liquidation, it must pay the other
company a mutually agreed price, which may be as little
as $1. Trains may not be purchased from companies in
liquidation.
If a phase change includes a reduction in the Train Limit,
all Public Companies, including the one operating, must
immediately discard any trains in excess of the Train
Limit to the Open Market.
Public Companies are never required to purchase a train,
and thus, unlike many other 18xx games, the president
may not contribute cash to buy one. However, if a company ends its operating turn without a train, it will be
liquidated.

6.8 Pay Loan Interest
After buying trains, interest is paid on all loans. For each
loan the amount due is marked in the “interest” column
of the Bank of New York. The company must make the
payment if possible, even if this means taking additional
loans. Fees must be paid on any additional loans taken to
pay the fees on existing loans. If the company has taken
the maximum number of loans allowed and still is unable
make the payment, its stock marker is placed in the red
liquidation space. The president takes the cash from the
company charter and must now make the loan interest
payment with personal funds. If the player is unable to

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 11
make this payment with cash on hand, follow the “Cash
Crisis” instructions in section [7.4]. After paying interest, the company may not take loans until it has
completed the “repay loans” step.

6.9 Repay Loans
The company may now choose to repay any number of
loans. When a company repays a loan, return the loan
marker from the company onto the lowest row that has
less than 5 loan markers on it and pay $100 from the
company to the bank. The stock price is moved one
space to the right as each loan paid off unless the stock is
already on the $600 space, in which case it does not
move. The company may now take loans following the
instructions in section [1.2.5]. After taking the desired
loans, if any, the company’s operating turn is over.

6.10 Check for Liquidation
If a company does not own a train at the end of its operating turn, place its stock marker in the liquidation space.

6.11 End of the Operating Round
Export the next available train by removing it from the
game. This may cause a phase change.
After a 2-train is exported at the end of the first Operating Round, remove all unsold 2-trains from the game.
2+-trains now become available.

7 Merger and Acquisition Rounds
The following activity takes place in the Merger and
Acquisition Round in order:
Convert or merge companies in white section of the
stock market, in operating order
Liquidate companies in the red liquidation area, in
reverse order they were placed in liquidation.
Acquire companies in the gray acquisition area, in
reverse operating order.
Offer for sale companies in the white section of the
stock market, in reverse operating order.
Companies in the red liquidation or gray acquisition
areas may not perform any action during this phase.
They may not convert, merge, or bid on other companies.
If a company moves into the gray acquisition area of the
stock market due to loans taken during an acquisition or
conversion, the company is not put up for acquisition
during this M&A round, and may not participate in further activity during this M&A round.

Version 1.0

If a company is above its train limit at any time, it must
put excess trains of its choice in the open market.
If a company ends up with more than one station marker
on a tile, it must remove one of the station markers and
place it back on its charter. This station marker may be
placed during a future operating round.

7.1 Converting and Merging
In operating order based on stock values at the start of
the M&A round, companies declare and execute conversions and mergers. A 2-share company may convert to a
5-share company or merge with another 2-share company to form a 5-share company, and a 5-share company
may convert to a 10-share company or merge with another 5-share company to form a 10-share company. If a
company does not declare a conversion or merger, it may
still participate in a merger with another company that
comes after it in the operating order.
Only companies in the white area of the stock market
may convert or take part in a merger. The presidents of
both companies in a merger must agree to the merger.
Companies are not required to be connected to merge.
Companies may only participate in a single conversion
or merger during the M&A round. Companies may not
merge in the same M&A round in which either of the
companies has merged or converted. A 2-share company
may not convert to a 5-share company and then also convert to a 10-share company in the same M&A round.
After converting or merging the President will have an
opportunity to buy shares in the newly formed company.
All other players will have an opportunity to buy one
share or sell shares they own in the newly formed company.

7.1.1 Conversion
To convert, place the extra shares on the charter and cover the 2-share circle with a 5-share marker or flip the 5share marker to the other side. Conduct the post conversion/merger purchase and sales process described in
section [7.1.4]. The company may now take loans following the instructions in section [1.2.5]. The company
must now purchase additional station markers. When a
2-share company converts to a 5-share it must buy one
station marker for $50 provided the company currently
has fewer than eight station markers. When a 5-share
company converts to a 10-share company, it must buy
two station markers for $100 provided the company has
six or fewer station markers. If it has exactly seven station markers, it must buy one station marker for $50. If
the company is unable to purchase the station markers,
its stock marker is placed in the red liquidation area.

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 12

7.1.2 2-Share Merger
Two 2-share companies may merge into a 5-share company by exchanging stock on a 2 for 1 basis. Choose one
company to survive, the other will disappear. Put the
contents of the company charters onto the surviving
company’s charter. Convert station markers to the new
company as described in section [7.3]. Place three single
shares on the company’s charter, and cover the 2-share
circle with a 5-share marker. The new stock value is the
sum of the stock values of the two 2-share companies
rounded down to the nearest market value. Place the
company’s stock marker so that it operates after other
companies with the same stock value. If the two companies had the same president, that player takes the
president’s certificate of the merged company. If the two
companies had different presidents, the president of the
2-share company that initiated the merger must purchase
one more share to get the president’s certificate; the other president receives a single share in the company.
Conduct the post conversion/merger purchase and sales
process described in section [7.1.4]. The company may
now take loans following the instructions in section
[1.2.5].

7.1.3 5-Share Merger
Two 5-share companies may merge to become a 10-share
company by exchanging stock on a 1 for 1 basis. Unlike
conversions or 2-share mergers, no new shares are created from the merger. Choose one company to survive, the
other will disappear. Put the contents of both company
charters onto the surviving company’s charter, and flip
the 5-share marker over to the 10-share side. Convert station markers to the new company as described in section
[7.3]. The new stock value is the average of the two 5share company’s stock values, rounded down to the next
stock value. Place the company’s stock marker so that it
operates after other companies with the same stock value. Replace shares and short shares of the disappearing
company with shares of the surviving company. If the
two companies had different presidents, then the President with the most shares after the merger is the
president of the merged company. If there is a tie, the
President of the company that initiated the merger is the
President of the merged company. Conduct the post conversion/merger purchase and sales process described in
section [7.1.4]. The company may now take loans following the instructions in section [1.2.5].
After two 5-share companies merge, it is possible that
more than five short shares exist in the surviving company. In this case, shares and short shares in the old
company are used as short shares in the new company
until there are five or fewer short shares in the new comVersion 1.0

pany held by players. Place the old charter under the
surviving company’s charter as a reminder that the old
shares are being used as shares in the surviving company. If a short share and a regular share of a company are
ever in the open short interest section of the stock market
and there are more than five short shares in play, the pair
are removed from the game (exchange as required to
keep only the surviving company's shares).

7.1.4 Post Conversion/Merger Process
This process takes place as part of a conversion or merger. First, the President may purchase any number of
shares from the company treasury (not from the Open
Market) subject to the certificate and company share
ownership limits in section [4.1]. Then each other player,
in clockwise order starting on the left of the President,
gets one opportunity to buy or sell shares in the company, or to pass. To buy, a player purchases one share of
stock from the company treasury only, if available, and
subject to the certificate and share ownership limits in
section [4.1]. To sell, a player sells any number of shares
of currently owned stock in this new company. Short
sales are not allowed during this process. A new player
may become president during this process; if this happens, section [5.4.1] applies.

7.2 Company Sales
Companies are only sold to other companies, never
directly to players. A company sale gives the purchasing
company the trains, station markers and private companies of the sold company. In acquisitions and friendly
sales, the company treasury and loans are also acquired
by the purchasing company. The sold company is then
returned to the storage area and may be restarted as a
new company later in the game. There are three types of
company sales: Liquidations, Hostile Acquisitions, and
Friendly Sales. While the process for executing a sale is
similar, the reasons for having the sale differ greatly.

7.2.1 Liquidations
Liquidations are caused when a company is no longer a
viable railroad business. This can be due to missing an
interest payment or not owning a train at the end of an
operating turn. In both cases, the company has shown an
inability to operate in a profitable manner and its stock
marker is in the red liquidation section of the stock market. The company has been closed and its assets,
excluding cash and loans, will be sold off to the highest
bidder. After the sale, any surplus cash after paying off
loans is divided evenly among the shareholders, while
any deficit must be paid by the President of the liquidated company. Because the bank makes the initial offer of

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 13
$0 for the assets, there is always a sale, and the company
always ceases to exist.

7.2.2 Acquisitions
Acquisitions are made when a company is in a weak
financial position and has let its stock value drop too
low. The company’s financial choices become limited
and the stock is illiquid and can’t be bought or sold. This
is indicated by the company’s stock market marker falling into the gray acquisition section of the stock market.
In this case a financially stronger company may prey on
the weaker company by making an offer to purchase the
company for as little as $10. All company holdings are
sold, including cash and loans. The acquiring company
must be able to afford the sales price and must be able to
take on and/or redeem all loans owned by the acquired
company, although it may use the cash from the acquired
company in doing so. If no offers are made for a company in acquisition, the company continues to operate
normally.

7.2.3 Friendly Sales
Friendly sales are offered by the President of the company when he believes he can maximize the value of a
company by selling it. The company must have a stock
value that is not in the red liquidation or gray acquisition
areas of the stock market. The president will announce
the company is being offered for sale. All company holdings are sold, including cash and loans. The minimum
purchase price is the market value of the company,
which is computed by taking the share price on the stock
market and multiplying it by the number of shares available, either 2, 5, or 10. After the sale, shares of stock in
the company’s treasury are sold to the open market at the
current market value. The cash infusion from selling
stock in the company’s treasury may significantly boost
the amount of cash in the company being acquired, and
can be a significant motivation for making the purchase.
As with acquisitions, the purchasing company must be
able to afford the sales price and take on or redeem all
loans owned by the sold company. If no offers are made
to purchase the company, it continues to operate normally and no shares are sold to the open market. Note that if
any offer is made, the company will be sold – the President cannot change his mind to sell it after offering it for
sale.

7.2.4 Sales Process
In reverse operating order based on stock values at the
start of the M&A round, companies with their stock
marker in the red liquidation space are liquidated, companies with their stock marker in the gray acquisition
Version 1.0

area may be acquired, and other companies may be
offered for sale. Companies in liquidation or acquisition
may not make purchases during the M&A round. A company whose stock value drops into the gray acquisition
section of the stock market as a result of a purchase is
not offered for acquisition sale and may not be offered
for friendly sale this M&A round. The following
describes how to perform these actions:
1) Companies in liquidation are always offered for
sale and will always be sold because the bank will
make an initial bid of $0. Companies in acquisition
are always offered for sale, but will only be sold if
another company makes a bid. Other companies
are offered for sale only if permission is granted by
the president of the company, and will only be sold
if another company makes a bid.
2) Prior to the auction for companies in liquidation,
the president removes the loans and cash from the
company and sets them aside.
3) Minimum bid: The initial bid for companies in
liquidation is made by the bank for $0. The
minimum bid for companies in acquisition is $10.
The minimum bid for friendly sales is the market
value of the company, which is computed by taking
the stock market price and multiplying it by the
number of shares issued by the company, either 2,
5, or 10. Note that since the winning company
collects remaining cash after selling any treasury
shares before paying shareholders, the acquired
company's assets may be used to pay for the bid.
4) Auction: Bidding starts with the player to the left
of the president of the company being offered for
sale. Going around the table starting with the
player to the left of the president of the company
being sold, presidents may bid on behalf of one of
their companies or pass; the bid may be any
multiple of $10 that is at least the minimum bid
and above the previous bid. The president of the
company being sold is additionally limited to
bidding no more than $10 above the previous bid
when bidding on behalf of his other companies. To
be eligible to buy the company that is for sale, the
purchasing company must be able to pay the
purchase price, allowing for all cash and loans that
may be acquired and any loans that the company
takes out to fund the purchase, as explained in
steps 6 and 7 below. Companies in acquisition or
liquidation are not eligible to buy other companies.
The president placing the bid must own at least one
eligible company. He is not required to identify
which of his companies is making the bid. Once a
player passes, he may not bid any further in the

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 14

same auction. When one player is left in the
bidding, that player’s company has won the
auction. The President that won the auction must
now identify which of his eligible companies will
make the purchase.
5) If there were no bids, a company not in liquidation
continues to operate as normal. If the high bid was
the $0 initial bid by the bank for a company in
liquidation, all the company’s station markers are
removed from the charter and the board, and its
private companies and trains are removed from the
game.
6) Treasury shares in the company being sold are
placed in the Open Market. If the company was in
liquidation or acquisition, it receives no
compensation. Companies priced in the green zone
of the stock market are compensated for each share
transferred at the current market value. The
company that won the auction now takes all trains,
station markers, private companies, cash and loans
from the charter of the acquired company
(excepting any cash and loans set aside in step 2).
Trains in excess of the limit must be discarded to
the open market. Convert station markers to the
new company as described in section [7.3].
7) The company that won the auction must now pay
the winning bid. The winning company may now
take loans following the instructions in section
[1.2.5], for example to generate the funds required
to make the purchase. For purchases of liquidated
companies, the payment is added to the cash and
loans set aside by the president of the company that
was just bought. For other purchases, the price is
paid to the bank. The winning company may now
optionally pay off any loans acquired from the
target company. For each loan acquired from the
target company, but not paid off, the stock price is
moved to the left one space, up to the left most
gray acquisition space on the stock market.
8) If the company sold was in liquidation, the
president of the liquidated company now settles the
company’s debts from the combination of the cash
and loans set aside in step 2 and the payment that
was added in step 7. If there is not enough cash to
pay off the loans, the president must make up the
difference with personal funds. If the president
doesn’t have enough cash, follow the “Cash Crisis”
instructions in section [7.4]. After paying off loans,
any money left over is paid to the bank. This
amount is used when settling with shareholders in
step 9.

Version 1.0

9) Shareholders and short shareholders settle on a per
share basis. The per share payment is computed by
taking the purchase price (or, for liquidated
companies, the surplus value from step 8) and
dividing it by the number of shares issued by the
company, either 2, 5, or 10, and rounding down.
Players owning shares in the company exchange
each share with the bank for the per share payment
amount. Players with short shares in the company
pay the per-share payment to the bank for each
short share owned and then return the short share
to the bank. If a short share holder does not have
enough cash to make this payment, follow the
“Cash Crisis” instructions in section [7.4]. If a
liquidated company has no surplus from step 8,
then all shares and short shares are simply returned
to the bank.
10) The company charter, share certificates, short share
certificates, stock, revenue, and station markers
from the sold company are now returned to the
storage area and may be used again.

7.3 Acquired Station Markers
Companies may acquire additional station markers
through mergers and acquisitions. Merge the newly
acquired station markers into the surviving company by
using the following instructions:
If there are eight or fewer station markers between the
two companies:
Replace station markers from the disappearing company
with unpurchased station markers from the surviving
company using station markers in the storage area. If
there are 2 station markers on the same hex the surviving
company must remove one and place it on its charter.
If there are more than eight station markers between the
two companies:
The president starts by selecting one station marker from
either company per hex to keep until eight station markers are chosen, or there are no more station markers on
the board to select. Take all eight of the surviving company's station markers and place one on the board in
each of the selected locations. Any station markers
remaining from the eight that the company has available
are placed on the surviving company's charter.

7.4 Cash Crisis
A cash crisis occurs if a player does not have enough
cash on hand to cover a required payment. This may
come about in the following situations:

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 15
One of the player’s companies is unable to pay its
loan interest and the player has insufficient cash to
make up the shortfall.
One of the player’s companies has been liquidated
and the player is unable to pay off its remaining
loans with cash on hand.
The player is required to pay the dividend for a short
share and has insufficient cash on hand.
The player has insufficient cash to settle a short
share following a company sale.
A player in cash crisis must sell one share of stock at a
time to the open market, subject to the limitations in
[5.2], until he has enough cash to make the payment.
Shares may not be sold that cause a president’s certificate from any company to change hands. If the player
has sold all the shares possible, and still can’t make payment, he is bankrupt and removed from the game. The
game continues without the player. The certificate limit
is increased to the number allowed based on the current
number of players remaining in the game. Use the following steps to liquidate the player’s holdings and
remove him from the game.
Place all the player’s stock shares, short shares, and private companies in the open market. If the president’s
certificate for any company is now in the open market,
place that company’s stock marker in the liquidation
space. If the cash crisis occurred during an operating
round, it is possible that this company will not operate in
this round. If the cash crisis occurred as a result of the
player being unable to pay loan interest on one of his
companies, all the player’s cash (including that raised by
the stock sales described above) is placed on the company’s charter. Otherwise, all the player’s money is
returned to the bank. If the cash crisis occurred as a
result of the player being unable to redeem the loans in a
liquidated company, that company’s remaining loans are
returned to the Bank of New York.
When liquidating a company that has no president, the
sale is managed by the banker and any shortfall is made
good by the bank (i.e. if the company has insufficient
funds to redeem its loans, they are simply returned to the
Bank of New York). The auction for the liquidated company starts with the player who was to the left of the
bankrupt player (or nearest to his left, if other players
have gone bankrupt as well).
At any time, if there is a share and a matching short
share in the open market, they are removed from the
open market and placed in the NYSE Open Short Interest
section. At the start of every stock round, the bank closes

Version 1.0

any short positions in the open market by purchasing
stock from the company treasury, if there is any available. The bank will continue to do this until all short
shares are cleared from the open market.

7.5 End of Merger Round
Advance the current round marker on its roundel.

8 End of the Game
The game end is normally signaled by the purchase or
export of the first 8-train. The game continues for three
more operating rounds. If this purchase (or export) is
during the first operating round of a set, then complete
this set of operating rounds, play a stock round, then
complete a final set of two operating rounds. If this purchase (or export) is during the second operating round of
a set, then complete this operating round, play a stock
round, then complete a final set of three operating
rounds. In both cases, the intervening Merger and Acquisition phases are played.
Each player’s total wealth is the value of his stock, at
current prices, minus the value of short shares, at current
prices, plus his cash on hand. Company assets and private companies count for nothing. The richest player
wins.
If all players but one have gone bankrupt, the sole solvent player is declared the winner.

9 Variants
All players must agree to the use of any optional rules
before the game begins.

9.1 Increased Short Sales
Up to ten shares may be shorted in a 10-share company
instead of just five.
Experienced players may enjoy this more brutal
approach to short selling. This variant greatly increases
the risk of converting or merging to a 10-share company.
The additional short shares available increases the potential cash a short seller can receive from shorting a 10share company and increases the potential damage to the
stock price of a 10-share company.
Note that this variant requires additional components (or
creative use of existing components).

9.2 More Players
Play with 8 to 12 players. Use the starting cash and certificate limit in the following table:

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 16
Number of
Players
8
9
10
11
12

Starting
Cash
$158
$140
$126
$115
$105

Certificate
Limit
8
7
6
6
5

1817 has not been tested thoroughly with more than seven players. Test games have been played with twelve
positions, but using far less than twelve players. The
game mechanics hold up well, and the game is playable.
When playing with more than seven players, it is likely
the game with end with fewer players than it started with
due to bankruptcies.

11 Appendices
This section is not part of the official rules.

11.1 Strategy Tips
1817 is a very open game with endless possibilities and
unique features. Taking loans and shorting stock are the
two most unique features. This strategy guide gives several in-depth examples on how to profit from these two
game mechanics. Reading and understanding these general guidelines and examples will help experienced 18xx
players acclimate to the financial climate in 1817.

11.1.1 General Guidelines
1817 permits a wide range of financial shenanigans,
but just because you can doesn’t mean you should!

9.3 Short Squeeze
If more than 100% of a company is owned by players at
the end of a stock round, move the stock right two spaces
instead of only one.
This increases the danger to short sellers by providing a
stiff penalty to short sellers that do not close out their
short positions quick enough.

9.4 Modern Trains
When running trains in section [6.5], 7-trains earn an
extra $10 and 8-trains earn an extra $20 per station
marker from the owning company on their route.
7-trains and 8-trains are often an inefficient consolation
prize for companies that were unable to buy a 5-train or
6-train. This variant increases their value, making them a
better purchase. It also rewards companies with plenty of
station markers on the board.

10 Conflicts and Errata
The official rules are this document (excluding sections
11 and beyond) plus any officially-published errata. In
the event of conflict between the official rules and any
components, the rules take precedence. Published errata
may be retrieved from:
http://www.deepthoughtgames.com/games/1817/

For clarifications or customer support, send email to:
support@deepthoughtgames.com

Don’t be afraid to abandon companies. Merging or
growing financially weak companies in an attempt to
save them often just makes a larger financially weak
company and attracts short sellers. It is not unusual
for 25% of all 2-share companies in a game to be
voluntarily abandoned into liquidation.
Pay off debt. Paying full dividends and then making
interest payments by taking more loans is dangerous.
Don’t get caught with a trainless company full of
loans!
Half paying dividends should be considered normal.
A half pay increases the stock price as well as
putting money in the company to justify the higher
stock value. Full payouts will tend to over value a
company and attract short sellers. Withholding will
tend to undervalue a company and reduce your personal earnings.
It is generally advisable to run as many trains as possible. While interest rates are below $20 per loan,
you should take loans and run more trains. When
interest rates hit $45 per loan, tragic consequences
are sure to follow.
Different company sizes provide a tradeoff between
dividend payout and stock value. A 2-share company
with a permanent train will pay you a very high dividend through the end of the game. However, owning
six shares in a 10-share company will provide
greater stock appreciation.
Players frequently will not get to their certificate
limit until the last stock round of the game. With
good holdings, you don’t need to be at your certificate limit to win.

Version 1.0

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 17
11.1.2 Private Companies
Private companies are generally worth about 50% to
75% of their face value. Experienced players may find
circumstances where the value falls out of this range. For
example, the Mountain Engineers is likely worth at least
$30, and perhaps even the face value of $40, to a player
that already purchased the Major Coal Mine.
Purchase private companies that will provide a synergy
for your starting companies. For example, if you purchased the Union Bridge Company, consider starting
companies in Louisville and Cincinnati. Both companies
can run a pair of 2-trains between Louisville and Cincinnati.
An example of a fairly complex synergy that may not be
possible in games with more than four players is the
Small Coal Mine, Major Coal Mine, Ohio Bridge Company, Mountain Engineers, and Pittsburgh Steel Mill. In
this case, start a company in Pittsburgh with the Pittsburgh Steel Mill and the Small Coal Mine and another in
Charleston with the remaining private companies. Build
coal mines from Atlanta to Charleston to Pittsburgh and
then regular track from Pittsburgh to Cleveland and run
two 2-trains in each company. This can be an extraordinarily profitable route, but is difficult to execute.
A slightly more complex method to value private companies is to estimate the earnings from the private company
before 3-trains come out. Once green tiles are available,
other players will open new companies that are co-located or adjacent to your starting companies and leech off
the route you worked so hard to develop. This reduces
the competitive advantage you enjoyed while having
exclusive use of the private company resources. For
example, say you bought the Union Bridge Company and
opened two 2-share companies in Louisville and Cincinnati with each company running two 2-trains between
the two cities. Once both cities are upgraded to green,
another player can start a 2-share company in Louisville
and run a 3-train from St. Louis to Louisville to Cincinnati. Your companies still enjoy the nice route, but other
players are starting to enjoy it as well. This reduces the
competitive advantage previously provided by owning
the private companies.

11.1.3 Initial Companies and Loans
The initial 2-share companies should almost always start
with at least $10 in cash. This provides the cash to make
interest payments on one or two loans in the first operating round. This extra cash may be the difference between
running a single 2-train and two 2-trains.

Version 1.0

Starting a company at a $55 stock price allows it to move
backwards three spaces the first operating round without
falling into the acquisition section of the stock market. A
starting company will move back one space on the stock
market for not paying a dividend and up to two more
spaces for taking loans. Starting with a $50 stock value
is sufficient for companies that plan on taking zero or
one loan in the first operating round.
The game starts with a very low interest rate of $5 per
loan and an unlimited number of highly profitable 2trains. The combination of low interest rates and highly
profitable trains means it is generally good for a company to buy as many 2-trains as it can run. Here is an
example of a 2-share company starting in Indianapolis
with $120 in cash at a $60 stock price. The company will
run until its 2-trains rust, and then liquidate.
In OR1a the company places a yellow city tile in Indianapolis with one exit heading North West towards
Chicago. In OR1b, the company places a straight track
tile to connect Indianapolis to the South East side of
Chicago and pays a $50 dividend. Assuming green tiles
are available in the second set of operating rounds, the
company will upgrade Indianapolis to a green $30 city
and pay out $80 for OR2a and OR2b. Based on a likely
lifespan of three runs, the 2-trains will probably not run
again. The total return from this company is $210 in dividends plus the liquidation value of the station marker
and $20 left in the treasury. Not bad for a $120 investment, but we can do better.
Now let’s examine how leverage can improve the financial results. In OR1a, the company pays $20 to lay an
extra tile so that the yellow Indianapolis city tile has
exits North West and North East. The second tile connects the North West side of Indianapolis to the South
East side of Chicago. The company takes two loans and
buys two 2-trains, then pays $10 in interest. The company finishes OR1a with two loans, two 2-trains, and $90
in cash at a stock price of $45. In OR1b, the company
pays $20 to lay two curved tracks to connect North East
Indianapolis to the East side of Chicago. The company
withholds the $100 dividend and buys a 2+-train, then
pays the interest on the two loans out of pocket. For this
example, we’ll assume the interest rate was $15 in
OR1b. At the end of OR1b, the company has two 2trains, one 2+-train, two loans, and $40 in cash with a
$40 stock price. We’ll again assume green tiles are available in the second set of operating rounds. The company
upgrades Indianapolis to a green $30 city and pay $20 to
lay an extra straight yellow track connecting Indianapolis
to Saint Louis. This time, the company withholds $220
in dividends. Along with its remaining $20 in cash, this
is enough to pay interest on the two loans (assuming $20

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 18

interest rate in OR2a) and pay off both loans. At the end
of OR2a the company now has two 2-trains, one 2+train, no loans, no cash, and a stock price of $45. In
OR2b the company pays out the full $220 dividend.
Again, assuming this is the last run of the 2-trains, the
2+-train will still have one last run for $80. In this example, the president received $300 using leverage versus
the $230 received in the previous example. In addition,
the station marker may liquidate for a higher price
because it has access to more developed routes.

11.1.4 Short Selling
Short selling is very risky, and can lead to both tremendous profits as well as personal bankruptcy. Two
examples of short selling are provided below; one highly
profitable, the other highly disastrous. It depends on your
perspective, as the short seller or the president of the
company whose stock is being shorted, which is which.
Evaluating a short target can be tricky, but a good starting point is to compare the company’s assets (known as
book value) to the company’s market value (stock price
multiplied by the number of shares issued, either 2, 5, or
10). Here is an example. There is a 5-share company
with a 3-train, 4-train, 3 loans, no cash, two station
markers, and no treasury stock. The book value is the
sum of all assets minus loans: $250 for the 3-train, $400
for the 4-train, $100 for two station markers (estimated
at $50 each), and -$300 for the three loans. This adds up
to $550 ($250 + $400 + $100 - $300). Divide $550 by
the 5-shares, and you get $110/share as the book value of
the company. If this company’s stock price is well above
$110, it may be a good short target. If the company’s
stock value at or below $110, it is probably not a good
short target.
Here is an example of a highly profitable short sale. For
this example, we’ll say your opponent read the first half
of this strategy guide, stopping just before the part on
short selling. He purchased the Union Bridge company
and opened two 2-share companies in Louisville and
Cincinnati, each running two 2-trains for great profit. At
the end of the second set of operating rounds he decides
to merge the two companies. He fatefully chooses the
Rutland railroad to survive the merger and buys one
share of stock in the newly merged 5-share company.
The Rutland now has four 2-trains, $120 in cash, two
station markers (Louisville and Cincinnati), two shares
of treasury stock, and a stock market price of $120/share.
There are three 3-trains remaining for sale before the 4trains become available. The president has made two
mistakes. The first is to get train locked with all the same
type of train. The second is underestimating your devious short selling plans.
Version 1.0

You enter the stock round with $300 in cash. The president of the Rutland thinks his four 2-trains will get one
more run. You know better. You short five shares of the
Rutland, collecting $600. You use the $600 along with
your $300 to open two 5-share companies at $150 stock
price, buying three shares of each. Both companies have
$400 after purchasing their second station marker and
are guaranteed to operate before the Rutland due to their
higher stock price. Assuming no action on the part of the
naïve president of the Rutland, the five shares in the
open market at the end of the stock round drive down the
Rutland’s stock price to $70 from $120. You operate the
first of your new companies and buy two 3-trains by taking two loans. Your second company buys the last 3train and the first 4-train by taking five loans. The president of the Rutland is panic stricken as his four 2-trains
rust before running. When the Rutland finally runs, it
doesn’t pay a dividend because it doesn’t have a train,
then takes four loans to buy a 4-train. Its new stock price
is now $45. In the second operating round, the Rutland
half pays his earnings of $160, giving the Rutland a single bump on the stock market to $50. You pay $80 to
cover the dividend for your short shares. The Rutland
pays off one loan for another bump to $55. Your new
companies ran before the Rutland in the second operating round, paying you enough money to easily cover the
$80 payment on your short shares. In the stock round,
you repurchase the five shares of Rutland at $55 each.
You receive a total of $600 from short selling. Closing
the position cost you $80 to cover the dividend and $275
to buy back the stock (5 x $55). Not only did you profit
$245 ($600 - $80 - $275) from the short sale, you also
funded two highly profitable 5-share companies!
This next example is of a short sale going horribly wrong
for the short seller. Everything is identical to the previous example, except that each of the 2-share companies
bought a 3-train prior to merging. So this time, the Rutland is a 5-share company with two 3-trains, two 2trains, two station markers (Louisville and Cincinnati),
$120 in cash, two shares of treasury stock, and a $120
stock price. You mistakenly figure the company isn’t
much better than last time, and short 5 shares, netting
you $600. Just like last time, you put the money to good
use opening two new companies.
Prior to the end of the stock round, the Rutland takes 4
loans, dropping the stock price to $80 and uses the $400
from the loans to purchase the five shares from the open
market. Your thinking “Hey, I’ve already made
$40/share in profit!” Unfortunately, because you already
sold Rutland stock, you can’t immediately buy it back;
you must wait until the next stock round.

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 19
In the first operating round, you dutifully rust the 2trains, leaving the Rutland with two 3-trains, seven
shares of treasury stock, $120 in cash, four loans, and
two station markers (Louisville and Cincinnati). However, this time, the Rutland runs the two 3-trains for $240
and pays out in full. You pay $240 to the bank for your
five short shares. The Rutland collects $336 ($48 per
share x 7 shares). The Rutland uses this to pay interest
on the four loans and pays off two loans. The payout
provides two bumps on the stock market and paying off
two loans gives it another two bumps. The Rutland’s
stock price is back to $120.
In the second operating round, the Rutland again earns
$240 and pays out in full. You pay $240 to the bank for
your five short shares. The Rutland again collects $336,
pays interest, and pays off two loans. Again, the Rutland
bumps four spaces on the stock market, and is now
priced at $180/share. You collected $600 from the short
sale, but had to pay $480 in dividends and are looking at
a $900 repurchase to close the short position. This looks
like a net loss of $780, but at least you got to borrow the
$600 to open your new companies, and they are paying
good dividends.
Then it gets worse, much worse. The president of the
Rutland offers the company for friendly sale at
$180/share, or $900 for the company. The first player to
his left makes the initial minimum bid of $900. This triggers the sale of Rutland’s treasury stock to the open
market for $1,260 (seven shares at $180/share). The Rutland now has two 3-trains, two station markers
(Louisville and Cincinnati), and $1,260 in cash! Other
players salivate at the opportunity and bid the company
up until it sells for $1,500. The winning company takes
the Rutland, including its $1,260 in cash, and pays the
purchase price of $1,500 to the bank. The president of
the Rutland smiles as he collects $900 for his three
shares that were worth only $360 (three times $120 starting price in this example) not long ago. You are now
required to make an immediate $1,500 payment to close
your short positions. You read section 6.4 titled “Cash
Crisis” and start liquidating your holdings. Unfortunately, it’s not enough and you are bankrupt. Your new
companies are placed in liquidation for others to feast
upon during the next M&A round. You have become
another casualty in the bloody game of high finance.
Let’s take a look at how the book value approach would
have helped evaluate whether or not to short the Rutland.
In the first example, the Rutland’s assets were four 2share trains ($400), two station markers ($100 when valued at $50 each), two treasury shares ($240), and $120
in cash. This totals $860, or $172/share. Compared to
$120/share stock price, the Rutland looks undervalued,
Version 1.0

and not a short target. However, in the first example, we
can force a change to the book value by rusting the 2trains before they run. Let’s examine the expected future
book value of the Rutland. At the end of the first operating round, the Rutland will have a 4-train ($400), two
station markers ($100 when valued at $50 each), two
treasury shares ($90), an estimated $40 in cash, and 4
loans (-$400). This totals $230, or $46 per share. By predicting future events, we see that the Rutland is
overvalued and a great short target.
The book value approach would also help avoid the catastrophic short sale in the second example. Let’s just
assume the 2-trains won’t run and omit them from the
book value. The Rutland’s remaining assets are two 3trains ($500), two station markers ($100 when valued at
$50 each), two treasury shares ($240) and $120 in cash.
This totals $960, or $192 per share. Even if we assume
the stock price will drop to $70 in response to the short
selling, we still have a book value of $860, or $172 per
share. The company is undervalued at a $120 stock price.
Rather than short the Rutland, it would be better to buy a
share and get $192 value for only $120!

11.2 Design & Historical Notes
1817 was born out of that desire for a very financially
sophisticated game in the 18xx series. Rather than name
the game after a 19th century year that had a significant
railroad milestone like many other 18xx games, 1817 is
named after the year the New York Stock and Exchange
opened on 40 Wall Street in New York. 1817 contains
financial mechanics not available in any other 18xx
game. These include short selling, market based interest
rates, corporate liquidations, and hostile takeovers.
Players will find that the most significant portions of the
game will be played in the Stock and M&A rounds.
While the operation rounds are important for determining a company’s income, the financial decisions are the
most important. Successful players in 1817 will continually monitor the financial situation of the game. Two
critical factors in 1817 are managing loans and short
selling.
Railroad history is full of mergers, acquisitions, and liquidations. Perhaps the most famous liquidation was the
Rock Island Railroad. The Rock Island was founded in
1847 and ran profitably for over 100 years. As its glory
years started to wane in the late 1950’s, the company ran
into financial difficulties. It had trouble modernizing its
trains and eventually tried to sell itself to the Union
Pacific in 1964. The sale was never completed, and in
1980 the company filed for bankruptcy. The company
was able to raise sufficient funds in liquidation to fully

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 20

pay all creditors. A similar scenario can occur in 1817
when a company owns two 4-trains. It will be highly
profitable for many operating rounds. As the 8-train
approaches and the 4-trains near their end of life, if the
company has not saved enough cash to purchase an 8train, it will offer itself for sale. The price might be a little too high, and so no buyer found. Once the 4-trains
rust, the company may get a high price for its wellplaced station markers. Perhaps the price is even enough
to fully pay off any loans with some cash left over to be
divided among the shareholders, just like the Rock Island
Railroad.
There were also highly profitable railroads that chose not
to modernize, and simply disappeared. From 1831 to
1850 the Chesterfield Railroad was the most profitable
railroad in the world. The Chesterfield finished building
its first and only route in June, 1831. The 13-mile muleand-gravity powered line carried coal from the Midlothian coal mines to the James River. When steam powered
competition arrived in 1850 the Chesterfield closed up
and abandoned its tracks. This is simulated in 1817 when
a 2-share company purchases a 2-train for cash and pays
out until the 2-train is rusted. This 2-share company has
the potential to be the most profitable company in the
game during its brief existence. After the 2- train is rusted, the company’s station marker is sold off in
liquidation, and the company closed down.
In many classic 18xx games there are a fixed number and
type of companies that exist from the start to finish of
the game. In 1817 you have the freedom to follow history, or create your own alternate history by starting,
closing, merging, and selling railroad companies. Many
companies will likely start throughout the game with the
majority of them disappearing before it’s over. The player that can most successfully navigate through this
financial hurricane will come out the winner.

11.2.1 Company Histories
The companies of 1817 were chosen for their display of
creative financing common at the dawn of the United
States railroad industry when startup failures, mergers,
hostile takeovers, and painful bankruptcies were frequent.
Alton and Southern Railway
The Alton and Southern Railroad was formed in 1910
and absorbed the Denverside Connecting Railway and
the Alton and Southern Railway in 1913. It was used to
serve the Alcoa Bayer process bauxite-to-alumina refinery at Alorton, Illinois. In 1968 the railroad was renamed
to the Alton and Southern Railway and sold to the Missouri Pacific Railroad. It was sold several more times,
Version 1.0

and today the Alton and Southern Railway is operated as
a wholly owned subsidiary of the Union Pacific.
Arcade and Attica Railroad
The Arcade and Attica began operations in 1917 after
three failed attempts. In 1836 the proposed railroad was
never constructed. In 1852 the railroad foreclosed before
completion. In 1870 the railroad went bankrupt prior to
completion. The railroad still transports agricultural
products and runs a popular tourist excursion.
Belt Railway of Chicago
The Belt Railway of Chicago commenced operation in
1902. It remained in general operation for only one
month, but continued to handle some small scale business until 1912 when it became necessary to tear out,
rebuild, and enlarge when twelve railroads leased the
Belt Railway of Chicago. Due to mergers and bankruptcies, the Belt Railway of Chicago is owned collectively
by six different railroads today.
Bessemer and Lake Erie Railroad
The Pittsburgh, Bessemer and Lake Erie Railroad Company was founded in 1897 by Andrew Carnegie to haul
iron ore and other products from the port at Conneaut,
Ohio on the Great Lakes to Carnegie Steel Company
plants in Pittsburgh. It was transferred to US Steel in
1901 and finally to Transtar in 1988.
Boston and Albany Railroad
The Boston and Worcester Railroad was chartered in
1831, the Western Railroad in 1833, the Castleton and
West Stockbridge Railroad in 1834. In 1867 and 1870
these companies merged along with the Hudson and Boston Railroad to become the Boston and Albany Railroad.
The New York Central purchased the railroad in 1900.
Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad
The Liggett's Gap Railroad was incorporated in 1832,
but stayed dormant until chartered in 1849. The Delaware and Cobb's Gap Railroad was chartered 1850. In
1852 both were consolidated into the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad. The railroad continued to
expand until 1915. Due to financial restraints, the company was forced to merge with the Erie Railroad in 1960.
Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railway
The Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railway began operations
in 1888 through the merger of the Joliet, Aurora &
Northern Railway and the Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Railway. The railroad expanded by purchasing five other
railroads. The Railroad continued to expand through
1899 by acquiring trackage rights and smaller companies. In 1901 the Railroad was sold to US Steel.
Grand Trunk Western Railroad
In 1928 the Canadian National Railway created the
Grand Trunk Western Railroad by consolidating its oper-

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 21
ating subsidiaries in Michigan, Illinois and Indiana, formerly named Grand Trunk Western Lines and Grand
Trunk Railway System. The Railroad continues to operate most of its original routes today.
Housatonic Railroad
The Housatonic Railroad, originally (mis)spelled as
'Ousatonic Railroad', was chartered in May 1836 to build
a line from Bridgeport, Connecticut north to the Massachusetts state line along the Housatonic River and was
completed in 1850. In 1892 the Railroad was sold to the
New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad. In 1983 a
new Housatonic Railroad was chartered.
Morristown and Erie Railway
The Morristown & Erie Railway was incorporated on
August 28, 1903 as a consolidation of the Whippany
River Railroad and the Whippany and Passaic River
Railroad, both owned by the same people, the McEwan
brothers. The Morristown and Erie was the only railroad
to be debt free at the start of World War II. The railroad
is still in operation today.
New York, Ontario and Western Railway
The NYO&W inherited the Oswego-New York corridor
from the New York & Oswego Midland in 1880. The
railroad continued to build new track through 1890. The
NYO&W entered bankruptcy in 1937. It operated in
bankruptcy until final abandonment on 1957.
New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway
Several railroads were chartered to build inland routes
from Pennsylvania mines to New York City. In 1881 six
of these railroads agreed to consolidate under the name
"New York, Susquehanna & Western Railroad Company". The Erie Railroad acquired the Susquehanna in
1898.
Pittsburg, Shawmut and Northern Railroad
The Pittsburg, Shawmut and Northern Railroad began in
1899 as the merger of five small railroads in New York
and Pennsylvania. The expense of connecting the four
geographically disparate divisions forced the company to
declare bankruptcy in 1905. It continued in receivership
until 1947.
Pittsburgh and Lake Erie Railroad
In 1870 William McCreery and ten other people filed
with the Pennsylvania Secretary of State to form The
Pittsburgh and Lake Erie Railroad. The group was not
successful at raising the required funds and in 1877
replaced many of the directors. The Railroad began oper-

Version 1.0

ations on a poorly built single track line in 1879. It was
bought out by the New York Central Railroad in 1887.
Providence and Worcester Railroad
The P&W was incorporated in Massachusetts as the
Providence and Worcester Railway in 1844, and as the
Providence and Worcester Railroad in Rhode Island. The
two companies merged 1845 as the Providence and
Worcester Railroad. The Railroad was bought by the
New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad in 1892.
Rutland Railroad
The Rutland & Burlington Railroad was chartered in
1843 to build between Rutland and Burlington. It was
renamed to the Rutland Railroad after mergers in 1867.
Never a solid financial operation, it entered receivership
for the first time in 1938. The Rutland continued in and
out of receivership until it was abandoned in 1963.
Strasburg Rail Road
The Strasburg Railroad was incorporated by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1832. A horse-drawn railroad
existed until 1851, when the rails were upgraded to
accommodate the first steam locomotive, the 4-2-0
William Penn. Regular passenger traffic ceased in 1901,
and the Railroad was finally abandoned in 1957.
Union Railroad
The Union was created 1896 as a consolidation of various railroads serving Carnegie Steel in the Monongahela
River valley. When Carnegie Steel merged into United
States Steel in 1901, the Union expanded to other mills
in Mon Valley. The Union Railroad continues to transport iron ore today.
Warren & Trumbull Railroad
Warren and Trumbull Railroad was formed when the
Mahoning Valley Economic Development Corporation
formed EDR-II to buy the ex-B&O line built by the
Painesville and Youngstown Railroad in 1870 and abandoned by CSX in 1993.
West Chester Railroad
West Chester Railroad Company became one of the
nation's earliest railroads through an act in the Pennsylvania legislature in 1831. It acquired another small
railroad in 1858. It became part of the Pennsylvania
Railroad system in 1881, and was known as the "Frazer
branch". In 2009 a new West Chester Railroad was
owned and operated by a nonprofit dedicated to historic
preservation.

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 22

12 Acknowledgments / Credits / Notices
1817 was designed by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers. 1817 was play tested extensively by Kansas City 18xx group
that includes Michael Backman, Vince Badali, Steve Smith, Dale Maxfield, and Dave Aber. Steve Thomas wrote significant portions of the rules and provided feedback to improve components. John Tamplin provided significant
feedback to improve the game mechanics and components. Dave Berry and Eric Brosius helped parts of the rules,
providing much needed clarification. Feedback and play reports from people around the world were helpful in refining the game. Production design and physical systems are by John A. Tamplin, who designed the tiles using
rendering algorithms and tile dictionaries from Marco Rocci.
References:
Brian Hollingsworth, The Illustrated Encyclopedia of North American Locomotives, Salamander Books, 1984.
Brian Hollingsworth, The Illustrated Encyclopedia of the World's Steam Passenger Locomotives, Salamander
Books, 1982.
Cover image by gruban and New York Pictures (licensed under Creative Commons, BY-SA).
http://ny-pictures.com/nyc/photo/picture/39959/flag_hangs_stock_exchange
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:New_York_Stock_Exchange_1882.jpg
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Stockexchange.jpg
http://www.loc.gov/pictures/resource/cph.3c24933/
http://www.loc.gov/pictures/resource/gsc.5a12096/
Trademarks:
1829 is a trademark of Hartland Trefoil Ltd.
Francis Tresham and Hartland Trefoil Ltd originated the 18xx Rail Tile Game System.
Use of trademarks without acknowledgment is not intended to disparage or challenge the intellectual property claims
made by authors or publishers.
The above enumeration is not intended to be exhaustive. Enumeration of certain individuals or companies is not
intended to disparage others.

Version 1.0

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

1817

Page 23

13 Train Manifest / Phase Chart
Train Type Train Limit Train Price

#
1

Rust

IPO

Off-Map

-

2

1st

2

4

$100

∞†

2+

4

$100

4

-

2

1st

3

4

$250

12

-

2/5

2nd

4

3

$400

8

2/2+ †2

5

2nd

5

3

$600

5

-

5/10

3rd

6

2

$750

4

3

10

3rd

7

2

$900

3

-

10

4th

8

2

$1100

∞

4

10

4th

†1 Discard all remaining 2-trains when one is exported [2]
†2 All 2+-trains may not be bought or sold once rusted, but last through the owner's Run Trains step [6.11]

14 Tile Manifest and Upgrade Table
Note: the counts in this table are what is supplied with the game, but all tiles are to be considered unlimited

Tile

#

Legal Upgrades

Tile

ap

m
7

30

B

X00

5

60

30

14

7

63

†1

7

54

1

80

7

545

81

7

546

63

40

611

#

Legal Upgrades

40

611
40

15

Tile

†1

63

8 No further upgrades

448

4 No further upgrades

544

5 No further upgrades

545

5 No further upgrades

546

5 No further upgrades

593

4

611

2 No further upgrades

X30

1 No further upgrades

597

4 No further upgrades

40

448

80

NY

62

B

592

6

7
40

NY

592
50

40

60

30

6

57

B

30

20

14

20

ap

20

9

6

Legal Upgrades
40

30

5

1
m

B

8
20

ap

m

20

50

Pittsburgh

#

30

15
30

14

546

30

619
30

15

60

619

82

10

544

545

80

B

546

B

597

40

7

5

80

82

83

83
50

8

20

80

81

82

83

10

592

9

20

82
30

57
†1

7

83
30

619

15

619

80

62

40

8
1

100

593

63
NY

NY

14

546
NY

40

30

545

B

4

30

20

544
60

B

†1
611

80

B

100

X30

Must use maximum number of exits (see [6.3.2])

Version 1.0

Copyright © 2012 by Craig Bartell and Tim Flowers

5 March 2012

