WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

1

R U L E S O F P L AY

Barbarossa to Berlin
By Ted Raicer

version 1.3
TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Introduction ..............................................................
Components .............................................................
Terminology and Rules Abbreviations ....................
Game Setup ..............................................................
Determining Victory ................................................
Sequence of Play ......................................................
Strategy Cards ..........................................................
Orders .......................................................................
Stacking ....................................................................
Movement ................................................................
Combat .....................................................................
Strategic Redeployment ...........................................
Supply ......................................................................

2
2
3
3
4
4
5
8
9
9
9
12
13

14. Replacements ...........................................................
15. Weather .....................................................................
16. Partisans ...................................................................
17. Neutrals ....................................................................
18. Resources .................................................................
19. National Restrictions ................................................
20. Campaign Scenario ..................................................
Optional Rules .................................................................
Credits .............................................................................
Counter scans ..................................................................
Clarifications ...................................................................
Card List ..........................................................................
Sequence of Play .............................................................

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

14
14
15
15
15
16
16
17
17
18
19
20
24

2

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

1. INTRODUCTION

SCU (Small Combat Unit)

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin is a game that allows two players
to simulate the course of WWII in Europe and North Africa
from the German invasion of the Soviet Union on June 22,
1941 to the fall of the Reich in May, 1945. The game is based
on the card system used in GMT’s Paths of Glory, but there are
many differences that need to be fully understood.

Full Strength

Reduced Strength

Nationality
Unit Type
Combat
Strength

Unit Size

Loss
Factor

Unit I.D.
Reduced
Strength Stripe

Movement
Allowance

LCU (Large Combat Unit)

2. COMPONENTS
1
1
1
2
1
2
2

Non-replaceable Dot (14.4)

22" by 34" Map
5/8" countersheet (88 units)
1/2" countersheet (280 units)
Player Reference Cards
Rules Booklet
Strategy Decks (55 cards each)
6-sided Dice

Unit I.D. in red box indicates a
special rule applies to this unit.
Movement Allowance in a red box
indicates unit has movement
restrictions.
Movement Allowance in a black
box indicates unit has severe
movement restrictions (usually,
must remain in home country).

2.1 The Game Map
The game map consists of a series of square spaces superimposed on a map of the terrain over which the 1941-45 campaigns were fought. These spaces are connected by lines representing road, rail, river and sea connections. Black lines are
“regular” connections used for all game purposes. Blue dotted
lines are land connections crossing rivers/water obstacles. Blue
dashed connections are Sea Move Strategic Redeployment (SR)
connections. They may only be used for SR and Limited Supply. Note that the ‘Corridor of Death’, connecting Leningrad
and Tikhvin, is treated as if it were a Sea Move SR connection
for all purposes. Individual boxes contain various symbols representing different types of terrain. These are shown on the
Terrain Key on the map; their effects are listed on the Terrain
Effects Chart.
The game map also contains a number of charts and tracks to
record various game functions. These include the General
Records Track (used to record the accumulation of Replacements and Axis Victory Points), the Action Tracks, the Eliminated Unit Boxes, Reserve Boxes, Allied and Axis Order Tracks,
and the Turn Record Track.

2.2 The Playing Pieces
COMBAT UNITS: Each square playing piece that has three
numbers across the bottom is a Combat Unit. There are two
types of Combat Units, Large Combat Units (LCUs, the 5/8"
units) and Small Combat Units (SCUs, the 1/2" units). Except
for the Soviet Union, LCUs are Armies and SCUs are Corps.
For the Soviet Union, LCUs represent Fronts and SCUs represent Armies. SCUs represent forces of between 20,000 and
60,000 men. LCUs represent large bodies of troops (up to
300,000 men) supported by heavy artillery, air units, etc.
COMBAT STRENGTH (CS): is a measure of a unit’s ability
to inflict damage in Combat.

MOVEMENT ALLOWANCE (MA): is a measure of a unit’s
ability to move.
Note that an SCU may be weaker in combat than an LCU with
a lower Combat Strength because LCUs perform their Offensive or Defensive Fire on a better Combat Fire Table than SCUs.
STEPS: All LCUs and SCUs are printed on both sides of the
counter. The two sides are called Steps, and all Combat Units
have two Steps. In each case the front side of the unit represents the unit at full strength, while the reverse side represents
the unit at reduced strength. Note that Soviet Mechanized Fronts
become infantry Fronts when taking a step loss.
MECHANIZED: All Combat Units with a Movement Allowance of 4 or greater are mechanized.
GAME MARKERS: There are several types of Game Markers
included in the game. Their use is described in the Rules.
COUNTER ABBREVIATIONS:
GE Germany
IT
RO Romania
BU
SU Soviet Union
US
BR Great Britain
CW
FF Free France
SW
TU Turkey
HU
YU Yugoslavia

Italy
Bulgaria
United States
Commonwealth
Sweden
Hungary

2.3 The Strategy Cards
Each player has his own deck of 55 Strategy Cards, subdivided
into 2 groups: Blitzkrieg cards and Total War cards. Each side
has 25 Blitzkrieg cards and 30 Total War cards.

LOSS FACTOR (LF): is a measure of a unit’s ability to take
combat losses.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

3. TERMINOLOGY AND
RULES ABBREVIATIONS

3

4.2 Unit Set-up

Asterisk (*): If a Strategy Card with an asterisk is played as an
Event or a Combat Card, it is permanently removed from the
game after this Action Round. It is not removed from the game
if it is used as an OPS, SR, or RP card.
Event Name: An Event Name in blue, bold italics indicates
that the Event is a pre-requisite for another Event and that there
is a marker with this Event’s name which players can use as a
reminder that this Event has occurred.
Activated: When a space has had its Activation cost paid for
movement or combat during an Action Round, all the units in
the space are considered Activated and conduct the action indicated by the Activation marker.

Place the units for both the Axis and the Allied players in the
spaces listed on the Set-Up at the end of this rules booklet.
Place all other units within easy reach of the map.

4.3 Initial Strategy Cards
AXIS: The Axis player must choose whether to start the game
with the Barbarossa Event Strategy Card or the Von Paulus
Pause Event Strategy Card in his hand. Regardless of the
card chosen, the other is shuffled into the Axis deck along
with the remaining Axis Blitzkrieg cards. The Axis player
then draws six cards, adding the previously chosen card to
make his initial hand.

Active Player: The player taking an action during his part of
the Action Round.
Combat Strength (CS): The offensive and defensive combat
ability of a unit, used to resolve combat on the Fire Tables.
Loss Factor (LF): The ability of a unit to withstand combat
losses. An opponent’s Loss Number must be greater than or
equal to a unit’s Loss Factor for it to be reduced.
Loss Number: The result from a Fire Table during combat.
Movement Allowance (MA): The number of spaces a unit may
enter during an Action Round when Activated for movement.

ALLIED: Shuffle the Allied Blitzkrieg cards and deal seven to
the Allied player.

Movement Points (MP): The cost to enter a space. All spaces
in WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin cost 1 MP.

TOTAL WAR CARDS: Set the Axis and Allied Total War cards
to one side for later use.

OPS Rating: The number of Activation Points which a player
may spend for movement and/or combat in an Action Round.

4.4 Turn 1 (June 1941) Special Rules

SR Rating: The number of points a player conducting a Strategic Redeployment action can use.

ORDERS: There is no die roll for Orders (Rule 8) on Turn 1.
The Axis player places three Stand Fast markers in accordance
with the Stalin Orders rules.

VP Space: Any space with a red border. When control of any
of these spaces changes, the VP marker should be adjusted by
1 in favor of the new controlling player.

ONE ROUND EACH: Turn 1 consists of one Axis Action
Round followed by one Allied Action Round. The Axis round
consists of play of either the Barbarossa or von Paulus Pause
Events, which must be played as an Event. The Allied player
may take any valid Action in his round, except that he is prohibited from playing a Strategy Card to gain Replacements or
as a Reinforcement Event.

4. GAME SETUP

Turn 1 is actually Round 6 of the Spring ‘41 turn, so any card
that cannot be played in Round 6, e.g., Bomber Command, may
not be played on Turn 1.

Space Control: Every space on the map is controlled by either
the Allied or the Axis player, or is Neutral. Control of a space
changes when a combat unit enters the space.

4.1 Marker Setup
• Place the Turn Record marker on the June 41 space of the
Turn Record Track.
• Place the Victory Point marker and the Axis and Allied Hand
Limit markers on the 7 space of the General Records Track.
• Place the Axis Orders marker on the None space. Place the
Allied Orders marker on the Stalin Orders space.
• Place all Replacement markers on the 0 space of the General
Records Track.
• Place all other markers within easy reach of the Map.

Following the Axis and Allied Action Rounds the remainder of
the sequence of play for a normal game turn (Attrition, Replacements, Draw Strategy Card and End of Turn Phases) is
followed.
PLAY NOTE: Both players will have six cards left in their hand
at the end of the Action Phase (unless they played some Combat Cards). Some or all these cards may be kept for Turn 2 or
discarded in the Draw Strategy Phase.
SOVIET RESTRICTIONS: On Turn 1 only, Soviet units forced

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

4

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

to retreat two spaces may not end their retreat adjacent to the
original defending space, e.g., a Soviet unit in Kaunas forced
to retreat two spaces could retreat to Pskov but not to Dvinsk.
The Soviet Union may not build trenches on Turns 1 or 2.
If the Allied player does not draw cards 2 or 24 in his initial
hand, he may discard all or all but one of the cards in his hand
and refill has hand. If he has still not drawn either card, he may
discard any 3 OPs or better card and draw card 24 in its place.
(It is suggested that players simply note this, rather than searching through the deck.)

5. DETERMINING VICTORY
5.1 Victory Points
Victory is determined by the Victory Point (VP) level when the
game ends. VPs are added when the Axis player gains control
of a VP space and subtracted when the Axis player loses control of a VP space, as a result of Event cards, and also Rule 5.2.
Exceptions: If Turkey is invaded by the Axis player before the
play of Casablanca subtract 3 VP’s. If Sweden is invaded by
the Axis player before the play of Casablanca subtract 1 VP. If
Vichy is invaded, do not add or subtract any VP’s, as Vichy is
still ‘neutral’.

5.2 Soviet Union, Egypt and Iraq
During the End Phase of each Winter turn the Axis player must
total the number of VP spaces he controls in the Soviet Union,
Egypt and Iraq (including spaces he controls that are occupied
by Partisan units). If the total is less than the numbers listed
below, he must subtract the difference from his current VP total. (Example: if at the end of Winter 1942 the Axis player controls only four VP spaces in the above countries, he must subtract 1 VP from his current total. If he controlled only three VP
spaces he would have to subtract 2 VPs.) In Winter 1945,
Courland may be considered a VP space for the purposes of
this rule (only). If the Herkules Event has been played, for the
rest of the game count Tobruk for the purpose of this rule.
Turn
Winter 1942
Winter 1943
Winter 1944
Winter 1945

5.4 Campaign Scenario Victory
The Campaign Scenario ends if a player achieves an Automatic
Victory, or at the end of the Summer 1945 Turn. In the latter
case the Axis player wins if the Allied player has failed to
achieve an Automatic Victory by the end of the last turn. There
are no draws.

5.5 Stalin
The Stalin counter starts in Moscow. The Stalin
counter can move only by SR (at a cost of 1 SR). If
it leaves Moscow it must SR to Kuibishev (if still
Soviet controlled and in supply). If Kuibishev has fallen or is
OOS, or if SRing from Kuibishev, the Stalin counter may go
anywhere on the map within the USSR (only).
• The Stalin counter does not count for stacking and has no
effect on combat.
• It may not retreat, and is eliminated if Axis units occupy its
space. If the Stalin counter is alone in a space during the
Allied Attrition Segment, and the space qualifies for change
to Axis Control as described in 13.5, the Stalin counter is
eliminated. If eliminated the Axis player gains 4 VP. If the
Stalin counter is anywhere but Moscow Soviet RPs are reduced (see 14.55 Moscow). Note: This rule has no effect on
Rule 8.5.
• If Stalin is currently in Moscow, Allied Stavka (3), Industrial Evacuation (7) and Siberians (13) cards are treated as
Yellow Events cards. In the case of Siberians, the Shock
Armies are placed on the map before and Move/Combat
markers. Stalin in Moscow subtracts 1 from Entrench attempt die rolls in Moscow.

6. SEQUENCE OF PLAY
WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin is played in turns, each of which
is subdivided into Phases and Segments which must be strictly
followed in the order listed below.

A. Orders Phase
Each player rolls one die (except on Turn 1) and finds the result on his Orders Table to determine if they must perform an
Order. The Axis player rolls and implements first (if he rolls
Hitler Orders). Move the Orders marker to the correct box on
the appropriate Orders Track to indicate the result.

Axis Required VPs in
Soviet Union, Egypt and Iraq
5
6
2
1

B. Action Phase

5.3 Automatic Victory
AXIS: The Axis player wins an Automatic Victory if the VP
total is 20 or more during the End of Turn Phase of any turn,
before the play of the Totaler Krieg Event.
ALLIED: The Allied player wins an Automatic Victory if the
VP total is 0 during the End of Turn Phase of any turn or he
controls all Axis Supply Spaces in Germany at the end of any
Allied Action Round.

Each Action Phase is divided into six identical Action Rounds.
Each Action Round allows each player to take one action. The
Axis player takes his action first in each Action Round. The
players continue to alternate taking Actions until each player
has taken six Actions.

C. Attrition Phase
The Axis Attrition Segment takes place immediately upon the
conclusion of the 6th Axis Action Round. The Allied Attrition
Segment takes place immediately upon the conclusion of the
6th Allied Action Round.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin
AXIS ATTRITION SEGMENT: Axis units are checked for attrition (13.44), and control of spaces behind enemy lines may
change (13.5). LCUs on the Turn Record Track (eliminated by
OOS Attrition three turns earlier) are placed in the Eliminated
Units Box.
ALLIED ATTRITION SEGMENT: Allied units are checked
for attrition (13.44), and control of spaces behind enemy lines
may change (13.5). LCUs on the Turn Record Track (eliminated by OOS Attrition three turns earlier) are placed in the
Eliminated Units Box. If no Allied unit can trace supply to a
Beach Head marker (whether they need to or not), that Beach
Head marker is removed from the map.

D. Replacement Phase
ALLIED SEGMENT: The Allied player spends any Replacement Points (RPs) accumulated through play of RP cards this
turn as marked on the General Records Track. Any RPs not
spent are lost.
AXIS SEGMENT: The Axis player spends any Replacement
Points (RPs) accumulated through play of RP cards this turn
as marked on the General Records Track. Any RPs not spent
are lost.

5

cards and Total War cards. Each player begins the game using
only his Blitzkrieg cards. The Total War cards are added three
turns after U.S. entry into the war (7.8).
FIVE WAYS TO USE A CARD: Strategy Cards may be used
in one of five possible ways: Operations (OPS), Strategic Redeployment (SR), Replacement Points (RP), Combat Card (CC)
or as an Event. Strategy Cards that may be used as a Combat
Card are identified with their OPS/SR Rating in a red box and
a “CC” at the bottom of the Event. Each card may only be used
in one way each time it is played, except for certain Event cards
which allow the same card to be used as an OPS card as well
during the same Action Round. The same card can be used in
the same or different way each time it is played during a game.
BLACK, RED, AND YELLOW: Strategy Cards with their OPS/
SR rating in a black box may be used as OPS, SR, RP or Event
cards. Those in a red box may be used as OPS, SR, RP or Combat Card. Those in a yellow box are dual-action cards, which
can be used as both an OPS and Event card, or as an OPS, SR,
RP or Event card singly. Note that cards with an asterisk (*)
following their Event name are removed when played as an
Event or Combat Card.

7.2 Action Phase

E. Draw Strategy Cards Phase
Unplayed cards may be held for the following turn or discarded.
After discarding, each player draws cards from his Draw Pile
to bring his hand to seven cards. Note that this hand size may
be increased or decreased by control of Resource spaces (Rule
18) on the map as well as the play of Events as marked on the
General Records Track.

OPS/SR Value
Number in a yellow
box indicates a “Dualaction” card—may be
used for both an OPS
and Event Card.

H. End of Turn Phase
1. The Allied player may eliminate any fully supplied British,
French or U.S. LCUs, placing them on the turn record track
three turns ahead (as if they had been eliminated OOS.)
2. Allied player may remove Beach Heads. Either player may
remove Trenches.
3. Remove any Stand Fast markers placed as a result of Orders.
4. Check for Automatic Victory (5.3) and Victory Point subtractions if this is a Winter Turn (5.2).
5. If the war has not ended and the last turn of the scenario has
not been reached, advance the Turn marker to the next space
on the Turn Record Track and begin the Sequence of Play
again with the Orders Phase.

7. STRATEGY CARDS

Event Name
Event Effects

German RPs
Axis RPs

Blue Italic
Event Name in
Blue Italic
indicates Event is
a pre-requisite
for another Event
and has a marker
to remind
players.

7.1 General Rules
In WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin, the Strategy Cards are the heart
of the game. The players initiate all actions including movement and combat through the play of Strategy Cards, with the
exceptions of Automatic 1 OPS (7.2) and Allied Partisan Placement (16.2).
BLITZKRIEG AND TOTAL WAR: Each player has his own
deck of Strategy Cards, subdivided into two groups: Blitzkrieg

Strategy Cards are played during the Action Phase of each turn.
There are six Action Rounds per Action Phase. In each Action
Round, each player is allowed to take one action. The Axis
player conducts the first Action in each Action Round. Each
player must take one of three possible actions:

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

6

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

• Play a Strategy Card as an OPS, SR, RP, or Event.
• Take an automatic Operation with an OPS Value of one (1)
without the play of a Strategy Card.
• The Allied player (only) may perform a Place Partisan Operation.
ACTION MARKERS: A player places the appropriate Action marker on his Action Track to indicate
which action he conducted.

7.3 Operations
If a Strategy Card is played as an OPS card, the player is allowed to spend a number of Activation Points equal to the
OPS/SR value of the card. A space costs the same number
of Activation Points whether it is activated for movement or
combat. The cost to activate a space is equal to the number
of different nationalities in the space. There are several exceptions listed below:
• Units in an Allied Beach Head space are treated as one nationality for Activation purposes.
• All British, Canadian and Commonwealth units are one nationality for Activation purposes.
• Free French and U.S. units are treated as one nationality for
Activation purposes.
• Axis Units in the Caucasus (13.6).
• Units in Limited Supply (13.3).
NOTE: A minimum of one friendly unit in a space is required
to activate that space.
MULTI-NATIONAL STACKS: The cost to activate a multinational space applies even if one or more of the units in the
space will neither move nor attack, i.e. a player may not withhold units in a space to lower the Activation cost.
MOVE/COMBAT MARKERS: Each space can be activated
for either movement or combat but not both.
A Move or Combat marker should be placed
on each space as it is Activated.
MOVEMENT STEP: After all activated spaces are marked,
the Active Player conducts the movement of all units in spaces
marked with a Move marker that he wishes to move. Units in a
space marked for movement are not required to move at all.
COMBAT STEP: After all movement is completed, the active
player conducts any combats that he wishes to initiate from
spaces marked with a Combat marker. Combat is voluntary,
and no unit is required to attack.

7.4 Strategic Redeployment
If a Strategy Card is played as an SR card, the player may use
Strategic Redeployment to move SCUs and/or LCUs. The
player receives a number of SR Points to spend equal to the
OPS/SR value of the card. A player may not play a Strategy
Card as an SR card if he played a Strategy Card as an SR card
in his immediately previous Action Round of this turn. A player
may play an SR card in the last Action Round of one turn and
in the first Action Round of the next turn.

7.5 Replacement Points
If a Strategy Card is played as an RP card, the player marks the
number of Replacement Points listed in the RP Box for each
nationality on the General Records Track. The player conducts
no other actions besides marking the Replacement Points during this Action Round. Replacement Points are spent during
the Replacement Phase of each turn.
RESTRICTIONS:
• NEUTRALS: The U.S. may not record replacements while
neutral, nor may the Axis record Axis replacements if there
are no active Axis countries.
• NON-CONSECUTIVE: A player may not play a Strategy
Card as an RP card if he played a Strategy Card as an RP
card in his immediately previous Action Round of this turn.
A player may play an RP card in the last Action Round of
one turn and in the first Action Round of the next turn.
• AXIS MANPOWER: On turns 8 through 11, the Axis player
may play only two RP cards per turn, while on turns 12 through
18, the Axis player may only play one RP card per turn.

7.6 Events
If a Strategy Card is played as an Event, the instructions on the
card must be followed.
7.61 Asterisk (*) Events: If a Strategy Card with an asterisk (*)
symbol is played as an Event, it is permanently removed from
the game after this Action Round. It is not removed from the
game if it is used as an OPS, SR, or RP card.
7.62 Reinforcement Event Cards: Each player can bring new
units (reinforcements) into play through the use of Strategy
Cards as Events. Only one Reinforcement card may be played
per turn for each nation. Exception: Neither player may play a
Reinforcement card on the June 41 turn. LCUs may only be
placed, whether entering as a Reinforcement or as a rebuilt
Replacement (see 14.3) in a space in Full Supply. Exceptions:
PanzerArmee Afrika (see below).
NOTE: A player may not play a Reinforcement card for a nation which can not legally place all of the reinforcements on
the map.
SCUs: Reinforcing SCUs are placed in the player’s Reserve
Box unless otherwise indicated.
LCUs: Reinforcing LCUs are placed in that nation’s capital and/
or any friendly controlled Full Supply sources or Urban Centers in that unit’s Home Country. Basra, Suez and Alexandria
are considered Home Country Full Supply sources for British
and Commonwealth forces. Basra is considered a Home Country Full Supply source for U.S. and Free French forces. There
are several exceptions for reinforcement arrival noted on the
Event cards and below.
• The British Desert Army is placed at Alexandria, Cairo or
Basra.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin
• The British 8th Army enters the game only as a replacement
for the Desert Army, and is placed in the space occupied by
the Desert Army, as long as the Desert Army is on the map
and in Full Supply.
• PanzerArmee Afrika is placed in Tripoli. One supplied German Panzer corps must be removed from Libya/Egypt and
placed in the Reserve Box.
• German reinforcements (or replacements placed as reinforcements) may not be placed in a supply source space unless that
space can itself trace supply to a different supply source space.
• Soviet Mechanized Fronts are exchanged on a one-for-one
basis for full strength, fully supplied, on map Soviet infantry
Fronts. Place the mechanized Fronts in the space of the infantry Front they are replacing, while the replaced infantry
Fronts are removed from the game.
• U.S./British units that are not part of an invasion (or the Desert
and 8th Armies) may enter at any eligible Beach Head (British units may not use the U.S. Beach Head and vice versa),
Naples if it is Allied, or Antwerp if it is Allied and the port
has been opened by the play of Clearing the Scheldt. Exception: Shingle. Allied Reinforcements entering on the Overlord Beach Head, Antwerp or Naples may have a Move or
Combat marker placed on that space. In 1945 (Turns 16-18)
Allied Reinforcements entering at Antwerp (only) may be
treated as Yellow Event cards. This is in place of, not in addition to, the move/combat marker placed on Allied Reinforcements in Antwerp.
• Allied Reinforcements may not be brought in on the Allied
Beach Head used for Shingle. Flip the Allied Beach Head
marker to its ‘Shingle’ side when in use for that invasion.
DESIGN NOTE: Shingle was a comparatively small scale operation. This rule means Shingle may only be reinforced by
SRing in corps.
7.63 Allied Invasion Event Cards:
One Allied Invasion Card may be played
per turn in addition to any other Reinforcement Cards. Each invasion card lists
the number and type (British, U.S., or
Allied) of Beach Head Markers that may
be placed. The card also lists the range
of lettered invasion spaces where the
markers may be placed. If two Beach
Head markers are placed as part of the
same invasion, they may only be placed
in invasion spaces which are linked by an Invasion Beach Link
(see terrain key).
In most cases invasion cards list reinforcements. The reinforcements are placed as follows:
• Those listed as To Reserve are placed in the Reserve Box.
• LCUs are placed at reduced strength on an eligible Beach
Head (except during Overlord, where they are placed at full
strength).
• SCUs are placed at full strength at an eligible Beach Head.

7

• U.S. and Free French units may only land at U.S. or Allied
Beach Heads, while British and Commonwealth units may
only land at British or Allied Beach Heads.
RESTRICTIONS:
• No Allied Invasions may take place at Beaches J, M-R, or TU while the Axis control any spaces in French North Africa,
Libya, or Egypt. No Allied invasions may take place at J, O,
or R while the Axis control Syracuse.
• The Allied Player may play Sledgehammer or Torch but not
both during a single game, and may play Round-Up or Overlord but never both during a single game.
• The Allied player may not invade at a beach that currently
contains a Beach Head marker. A Beach Head marker may
not be removed voluntarily if the Beach Head is the only
source of supply for any units on the map.
• Beach J may not be invaded if Allies currently have Beach
Head at Beaches A or B.
• All of the units specified in an invasion must be used in that
invasion.
• The U.S. 7th Army and the British 8th Army may be involved in invasions after they have already entered the game.
To take part in an invasion they must currently be in the Allied Reserve Box (this is an exception to the rule that LCUs
are never placed in the Reserve Box). At the end of any Allied round when North Africa is cleared of Axis controlled
spaces, the British 8th Army may be placed in Reserve (or
rebuilt there if eliminated). The U.S. 7th may be placed in
Reserve at the end of any Allied round if its is in supply (or
rebuilt there if eliminated). They may only leave the Reserve
Box by invasion. The U.S. 7th Army may not be on the map
but may be in the Reserve Box when either Avalanche or
Shingle is played.
INVASION PROCEDURE: Invading units get a Combat
marker. If there is no Axis defender they may advance into the
connecting land space. In either case, advance after combat from
the beaches on the initial invasion round must end in the adjacent space.
Axis units may never enter an invasion beach. If all Allied units
in an invasion beach are eliminated in combat, the Beach Head
is removed. Axis units may attack an empty Beach Head—in
such an attack no die is rolled and the Beach Head is automatically removed. Beach Heads may also be removed by the Allied player during the End of Turn Phase. Beach Heads may
always be reused.
Beginning on turn 14 and thereafter, the Allied player may announce at the start of his first Action Round that he is performing no further invasions for the rest of the game. Any remaining
unplayed invasions may then be played as normal non-invasion
reinforcements (as well as their usual OPS, SR and Replacement roles). If played as a reinforcement card, any LCUs listed
already in play, including in the Reserve Box, are simply ignored. (Any LCUs in the Reserve Box when Husky or AnvilDragoon is played as a regular reinforcement, consider them
shipped to the Pacific Theater, and remove them from the game).

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

8

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

Torch, Sledgehammer, Round-Up and Overlord may only be
played (as Events) as invasions, and may not be played as Reinforcement Events.

he may chose any one of the Blitzkrieg cards to include in his
initial Total War hand.

Once the Allied player has decided to use any further Invasion
cards as Reinforcements, the use of any card containing both
British and US is considered to be the one reinforcement action for both nationalities for that turn.

Strategy Cards are either in a player’s hand, the Draw Pile,
Discard Pile or in a separate pile of used Events.

7.64 Combat Cards:
Combat Cards can be played during a combat to influence it.
The attacker must play Combat Cards before the defender.
Combat Cards are the only cards which can be played during
an opponent’s Action Round.
REPEATED USE: If a player plays any
Combat Cards and wins the combat, the
player places those Combat Cards face
up on his side of the map, except for
Combat Cards marked with an asterisk
(*), which are removed immediately after the combat they are used in. These
cards can influence other combats (each
a maximum of once per Action Round)
initiated by either player in which their
conditions apply. The Combat Cards can last for the entire
Action Phase, or until the player loses a battle while using them.
If a player loses a combat and used any Combat Cards, whether
played specifically for this combat or saved from a previously
won combat, those Combat Cards are discarded.
At the end of each Turn, all Combat Cards which were played
must be discarded, even if the player was victorious in every
battle in which the card was used. Place the card in the player’s
Discard Pile.
7.65 Intelligence: When an Event is played that calls for a
player to reveal some or all of his cards to the opposing player,
the affected cards are to be displayed face-up throughout the
turn and may be concealed again only after the Event no longer
applies.

7.7 Minimum and Maximum Hand Size
After drawing cards in the Draw Strategy Cards Phase, no player
may have a hand size greater than eight or less than five (though
it is possible to have fewer than the minimum allowed available). Exception: There is an Axis minimum hand size of two
on turns 16-18.

7.8 Total War
Three turns after the United States enters the war, the Total War
portion of the deck is added to the game for both sides. Simply
add all discards and undrawn Blitzkrieg cards to the Total War
cards and shuffle before dealing. The Axis player may draw the
Totaler Krieg! card automatically before drawing his remaining cards. For example if the U.S. entered the war on turn 4 the
cards would be added on turn 7 and would first be available
for use on turn 8. Before the Allied player shuffles his discarded and undrawn Blitzkrieg cards in with his Total War cards,

7.9 Discarding and Shuffling

DISCARDING: During the Draw Strategy Card Phase, players are allowed to discard as many cards as they choose before drawing. Players may never examine an opponent’s
Discard Pile.
SHUFFLING: If there are insufficient cards in the Draw Pile
during the Draw Strategy Phase, all remaining cards in the Draw
Pile must be drawn first, then the Discard Pile is shuffled and
any remaining cards are drawn as needed.

8. ORDERS
8.1 Orders Table
Each player rolls once on his Orders Table, Axis player first, at
the start of every turn, except Turn 1, and places his Orders
marker on the resulting space on the Orders Track. If the result
is None, there is no effect. If the result is a Mandated Offensive, see 8.2.

8.2 Mandated Offensive (MO)
If the result is a Mandated Offensive, the Germans, Western
Allies or Soviets must conduct at least one attack that turn or
occupy an enemy controlled space with any unit. The requirement to occupy and/or capture is the same, i.e., a unit of the
appropriate type must change the control of the space. There is
no requirement to stop moving. If the player does not do so,
there is a 1 VP penalty. If the Axis player suffers the penalty,
the VP level is decreased by one. If the Allied player suffers
the penalty, the VP level is increased by one.

8.3 Requirements of a Mandated Offensive
• For an OKW Mandated Offensive, the German player must
attack a unit or capture an Allied controlled space outside
the Soviet Union.*
• For an Allied Mandated Offensive the Allied player must
attack with a British or U.S. unit or occupy an Axis controlled space with a British or U.S. unit.*
• For a Soviet Mandated Offensive, the Allied player must attack any Axis unit with a Soviet LCU, or capture an Axiscontrolled space using any Soviet unit.
* If there are no such units or spaces, or the Axis has no units
in North Africa and the Allies have none in Europe, ignore
Allied and Axis Mandated Offensives.
• If there are no valid spaces to occupy or attack when a Mandated Offensive is rolled, the Mandated Offensive is ignored
for that turn (treat as a result of ‘None’ on the Orders table).

8.4 Hitler Orders

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

If the Axis Player rolls ‘Hitler Orders’, the Allied
player may place three Stand Fast markers on any
spaces containing Axis units that are adjacent to a

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin
supplied (Limited or Full) Allied unit. Axis units in that space
may exit that turn at a cost of 1 VP (per space) removing the
Stand Fast marker as they do so. Alternatively the unit(s) may
leave and remove the marker at no VP cost if it is forced to
retreat out of the space, if it advances out of the space after
combat, or if the first space it enters on leaving is under enemy
control. Any friendly units that start an Action Round in an
Orders space are subject to those orders even if they did not
occupy the space when the orders were placed. After play of
the Bomb Plot Event, the Axis player pays 1 VP per German
unit (not space) to ignore Hitler Orders.

8.5 Stalin Orders
If the Soviet Player rolls ‘Stalin Orders’, the Axis
player may place three Stand Fast markers on any
spaces containing Soviet units that are adjacent to a
supplied (Limited or Full) Axis unit. Soviet units in that space
may exit that turn at a cost of 1 VP (per space) removing the
Stand Fast marker as they do so. Alternatively, the unit(s) may
leave and remove the marker at no VP cost if it is forced to
retreat out of the space, if it advances out of the space after
combat, or if the first space it enters on leaving is under enemy
control. Any friendly units that start an Action Round in an
Orders space are subject to those orders even if they did not
occupy the space when the orders were placed.

9. STACKING
9.1 General Rules
A maximum of three (3) combat units, regardless of type or
size, may stack per space. Stacking is in effect at all times except during SR and movement. Units may never enter a space
containing an enemy combat unit.

9.2 Special Rules
• Soviet units may never stack with any other nationality.
• The Yugoslav Partisan Army may not stack with any other
unit.
• Hungarian and Romanian units may never stack together.

10. MOVEMENT

9

Mechanized units (whether in Full or Limited Supply) may end
their move in a space with a Combat marker. If they do so, they
lose their Move marker and are considered activated for combat instead.
PLAY NOTE: In this way a Mechanized unit can both move
and attack in the same Action Round.

10.2 Trenches
SOVIET: If a space containing a Soviet LCU is
Activated for movement, one LCU unit in the Activated space may attempt to entrench instead of
moving. Other units in the space may move freely.
After all movement for the Action Round is complete, the player
rolls a die for each space which has an LCU attempting to entrench. If the die roll is 1–3, place a Level-1 Trench marker in
that space or flip a Level-1 Trench marker to its Level-2 Trench
side. The number of trench markers provided is an absolute
design limit.
EXCEPTIONS:
• The Soviet Union may not build trenches on Turns 1 or 2.
• Soviet Trenches may only be built in Urban spaces in the
Soviet Union in 1941-42 (Turns 1–7).
• Trench 2 markers may only be built in 1943-45 (Turns 8+).
REMOVAL: Soviet and British Trenches are removed from the
map either when the space becomes Axis controlled or as
the Allied player chooses during the End of Turn Phase. The
British Trench at Tobruk is removed once the Axis controls
the space, or when the Allies control Benghazi. It may not
be rebuilt.
AXIS TRENCHES: Axis Trenches are placed only as the result
of Events or initial setup. They are removed if the Allies control the space or if the Axis player chooses to remove them
during the End of Turn Phase. There may be no more than three
non-West/Atlantic Wall Axis trenches in play at any one time.
Axis trenches may not be rebuilt.

10.3 Forts
Forts may only be used by the player who owned
them at the beginning of the game. If an enemy unit
enters a space with a fort symbol, the fort is destroyed
(place a Fort Destroyed marker). The fort may not be replaced.

11. COMBAT

10.1 General Rules
Combat units may move when their space is Activated for movement during an Operation. All spaces cost 1 MP to enter regardless of the terrain type. Movement must be from space to
space connected by a regular connection; spaces may not be
skipped. A unit may never spend more Movement Points than
its Movement Allowance in a single turn. Unused Movement
Points cannot be accumulated for future turns or transferred to
other units.
MOVEMENT AND COMBAT MARKERS: Non-mechanized
and OOS Mechanized units may move through but not end their
movement in a space containing a Combat marker. Supplied

11.1 General Rules
A combat can be initiated only during an Operation by combat
units in an Activated space with a Combat marker. Combat is
voluntary and not all units in a space have to attack. The active
player is called the attacker and the non-active player is the
defender.
DEFENDING SPACE: Each combat may involve only one defending space. A single space may only be attacked once per
Action Round. All units in a single space defend as a whole,
except for units which have retreated into that space during
that Action Round.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

10

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

MULTI-SPACE COMBAT: Combat is normally between two
adjacent spaces. Units in other spaces may attack in combination with the first attacking space as long as there is a
mechanized unit in each additional attacking space which
is also attacking the defending space.
EXAMPLE: If Soviet units attack a German unit from three
adjacent spaces, two of those spaces would have to contain an
attacking Tank Army or Mechanized Front.
Activated units in a single space do not have to participate in
the same combat (or any combat). They may attack different
adjacent spaces. A unit’s Combat Strength cannot be divided
between multiple combats.
OTHER RESTRICTIONS:
• Each unit can participate in only one combat per Action
Round.
• Only attacking units participating in a combat may take losses
or advance. If there are non-participating units in the attacking space, they are not allowed to take losses or advance.
ZERO STRENGTH UNITS: SCUs with a Combat Strength of
0 can attack by themselves or with other units. If they attack
with other units, they will add nothing to the Combat Strength
of the combat but they can absorb losses.
NORDLICHT, TAIFUN and FALL BLAU: The Axis player
may not attack the Leningrad space until Nordlicht has been
played, the Moscow space until Taifun has been played, or any
of the Blau spaces until Fall Blau has been played. They may
however move into these spaces at any time if they are vacant.
Once the appropriate card has been played these restrictions
are removed for the rest of the game. Axis control of Leningrad
removes the restriction on attacks on Leningrad, Axis control
of Moscow removes the restriction on attacks on Moscow, while
Axis control of any of Maikop, Stalingrad, or Armavir removes
the restriction on attacking any of the Blau spaces.
DESIGN NOTE: These cards represent wrangling over strategy between Hitler, OKH, and the commanders at the front.

4. Determine Die Roll Modifier (DRM): Both players examine all played and selected Combat Cards to determine the final DRM which will affect this combat. This step is conducted
simultaneously.
5. Determine Fire Column: Each player determines which
Fire Table he will use. If the player’s units contain one or more
LCUs (even if reduced), the player fires on the LCU Table;
otherwise, the player uses the SCU Table. Each player finds
his Combat Strength on the appropriate Fire Table and shifts a
number of columns depending upon the Terrain Effects of the
defending space (terrain and trench effects are cumulative) to
determine his Fire Column. Column shifts can not cause the
Fire Column to be off the Tables. If the column shifts would
take the Fire Column above the right-most or below left-most
column, any additional shifts are ignored. This step is conducted
simultaneously.
6. Determine Results: Each player rolls a die, modifies it by
his DRM and cross references it with his Fire Column to determine his result. A die roll can never be modified to less than 1
or greater than 6. Treat any modified die roll below 1 as a 1 and
any modified die roll above 6 as a 6. This step is conducted
simultaneously.
7. Take Losses: Each player must now apply the combat losses
required by his opponent’s result, defender first.
8. Determine Winner: The player who causes his opponent
the higher Loss Number wins the combat and is allowed to
keep any played or selected Combat Card Events (except for
those requiring immediate removal from the game, 7.1). The
losing player must discard all played and selected Combat Cards.
If both players’ Loss Numbers are the same, both players are
considered to have lost and must discard.
9. Defender Retreat: If the requirements are met, the defender
may have to retreat one or two spaces (11.4). The defender
may have the option to cancel the retreat by taking an additional step loss (11.42).

Each combat is resolved using the following procedure in the
order given:

10. Attacker Advance: If the defender retreated or was completely eliminated, the attacker has the option to advance with
any remaining units. Mechanized units advance differently from
non-mechanized units.

1. Designate the Combat: The active player designates which
units are attacking and which space they are attacking.

11.3 Taking Losses

11.2 Combat Resolution

2. Determine Combat Strengths: Each player totals the Combat Strengths of the units involved in the combat to determine
his total Combat Strength. This step is conducted simultaneously.
3. Play Combat Cards: The attacker may play any number of
Combat Cards whose conditions are met by this combat. In
addition, the attacker can select to use any Combat Cards that
are in front of him whose conditions are met by this combat
and which have not been used in a previous combat during this
Action Round. After the attacker plays and selects all his Combat Cards, the defender has the opportunity to play and select
Combat Cards using the same procedure.

The result of each player’s die roll on the Fire Table is his
opponent’s Loss Number. Losses are taken by reducing or eliminating combat units. Each step removed from a unit provides
the unit’s LF towards fulfilling the Loss Number. Each player
must fulfill as much of his Loss Number as possible without
taking more losses than his Loss Number. The player may not
take fewer losses than required if it is possible to take the exact
Loss Number, but the player never takes more losses than the
Loss Number.
If a player has LCUs involved in a combat with no appropriate
SCUs in the Reserve Box available for replacing them, and it
would be possible to fulfill more of the Loss Number inflicted
in that combat if such an SCU were in the Reserve Box, losses

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin
must be taken as if such an SCU existed, resulting in the permanent elimination of the LCU.
EXAMPLE: If the Axis player had a full strength infantry LCU
and a reduced Panzer LCU in a combat, with no Panzer SCU
in Reserve, and the Loss Number is 4, he could flip the infantry
LCU and ignore the extra point. But if the Loss Number was 5,
the Panzer LCU would have to be permanently eliminated, since
if a panzer SCU was in the Reserve Box, the full Loss Number
could have been taken. Note if an infantry SCU were also involved in this example, it would never be required to eliminate
the Panzer LCU, since the required number of losses could
always be taken by units on the map.

Elim
EXAMPLE: A full strength German Army (LF 3) and a reduced
strength German Army (LF 3) suffer a 5 Loss Number. The
player must eliminate the reduced strength Army and replace
it with an SCU (LF 1). The SCU then must take two step losses
and be eliminated. The full strength Army remains intact.
11.31 Eliminated LCUs: A reduced strength LCU which is
eliminated is replaced immediately in its current space by a full
strength SCU from the Reserve Box according to the list below, if one is available. If a full strength SCU is not in the Reserve Box, it may be replaced by a reduced strength SCU. If no
SCUs of the appropriate nationality and type are available, the
LCU is permanently eliminated and may not be rebuilt through
Replacement.
• Soviet 5-3-4 and 3-3-3 Fronts are both replaced by a regular
infantry Army.
• Axis Allied Armies are replaced by an infantry SCU of the
same nationality.
• British Armies are replaced by British or CW corps.
• The Canadian Army must be replaced by a CW corps.
• U.S. Armies are replaced by a U.S. corps.
• The German 1st through 5th Panzer Armies and PzAA are
replaced by a regular (non-SS) panzer corps.
• The German 6th SS Panzer Army must be replaced by an SS
Panzer corps.
• German Infantry Armies are replaced by a German infantry
corps.
• Non-Soviet LCUs eliminated while OSS suffer the effects
of 13.44.
Replacement with an SCU from the Reserve Box can occur
even if the LCU is OOS. If an OOS LCU is eliminated in the
Attrition phase, an appropriate SCU from Reserve Box is eliminated as well. Replacement with an SCU is not optional—if an
SCU is available, the replacement must occur.
11.32 Soviet Southwest Front: The Soviet Southwest Front
non-replaceable mechanized unit must take the first step loss
(if any) when attacking (only). See also 14.51.

11

11.4 Retreats
If the attacker wins the combat any defending units not eliminated must retreat, unless the defender uses the no retreat option (11.42). Attacking units never retreat.
11.41 Length of Retreat: The number of spaces of the retreat
depends upon the difference in the Loss Numbers. If the difference is one, the defender must retreat one space. Otherwise,
the defender must retreat two spaces.
11.42 Ignoring Retreats: Defending units in Trenches, Forests, Mountains, Forts, Swamps, Beach Heads and units defending from an attack solely across the Skagerrak (Oslo/
Jutland and Copenhagen/Malmo) may choose to ignore a retreat by taking one additional step loss. This is not just an increase in the Loss Number. The step loss can be from any defending unit. One additional loss cancels the retreat, regardless
of the number of retreat spaces required, provided at least one
defending step remains after the additional loss.
Antwerp, if Allied controlled, is considered to be No Retreat
terrain.
Important Exception: If the Barbarossa or von Paulus Pause
Event is played, Soviet Trenches may not be used to cancel
retreats on Turn 1.
11.43 Elimination Due to a Retreat: Units which cannot perform retreat nor ignore the retreat by taking an extra step loss
are eliminated. LCUs eliminated for failure to retreat are treated
as if eliminated OOS.
11.44 Retreat Retrictions: Units which retreat must follow
the restrictions below:
• May not enter a space containing an enemy unit.
• Must retreat into friendly controlled spaces if possible, but
may retreat into empty enemy controlled spaces if it is not.
• May not retreat back into the original defending space.
• May end their retreat adjacent to the original defending space
if retreating two spaces as long as the units entered two spaces
during the retreat. Retreating units can retreat to different
spaces. See First Turn rules for Soviet exception to this rule.
• STACKING: May retreat through a space in violation of the
stacking limits, but may not end its retreat overstacked.
• SUPPLY: Must end their retreat in supply if possible.
• PARTISANS: Axis units may not retreat into a space containing an Allied Partisan marker if any other retreat route is
available. This takes precedence. Units may not retreat
through a Partisan marker. If forced to retreat into a space
with a Partisan Marker the retreat is halted there.
11.45 Combat Against Previously Retreated Units: If defending units retreat into a space which is attacked later in the
same Action Round, the units which already retreated do not
add their Combat Strength to the combat against this space. In
addition, if a Loss Number of at least 1 is achieved, the already
retreated units are immediately eliminated and do not count
towards fulfilling the Loss Number.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

12

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

11.5 Advance

12.3 Restrictions

Any remaining attacking units may advance if the defending
units retreat or are completely eliminated. The defender may
never advance.

• Units must be in supply, Full or Limited, to use SR. Units in
Limited Supply may not SR to the Reserve Box.
• LCUs may never SR across a Sea Move SR line.
• PARTISANS: Axis units may not SR into or out of Allied
Partisan spaces.
• DESERT SPACES: Units may SR into or out of, but not
through a Desert Space.
• TURKEY: No unit may SR overland in Turkey.

11.51 Length of Advance
• If all defending units are eliminated, advancing non-mechanized units must halt in the defender’s space, while advancing mechanized units may advance up to three spaces.
• If all defending units retreated one space, advancing nonmechanized units may advance into the space vacated by the
defender, while advancing mechanized units may advance
up to two spaces.
• If all defending units retreated two spaces, advancing nonmechanized units may advance into any spaces which the
retreating units vacated. Advancing mechanized units may
advance up to three spaces.
11.52 Terrain and Advance: Mechanized units must stop their
advance when entering a Forest, Mountain, Fort or Swamp
space.
11.53 Advance Path: Regardless of the length of the defender’s
retreat path, advancing mechanized units may ignore the
defender’s path of retreat and advance into any spaces they
could normally move into (exception: 11.52). Advancing
mechanized units are not required to advance into the space
vacated by the defender. Advancing mechanized units may not
end their advance in a space with a Combat marker.
11.54 Soviet Shock Armies: Soviet Shock Armies
may advance a maximum of one space.

12.4 SR and the Reserve Box
OUT OF: Units may SR out of the Reserve Box into any space
in their home country (and then stop) containing a friendly Capital, Supply Symbol or Urban center in Full Supply, within the
stacking limit. This does not include Syracuse, which is a limited supply source.
INTO: Fully Supplied SCUs units may SR from the map to the
Reserve Box. LCUs may not SR to the Reserve Box. See the
6th bullet under the restrictions of 7.63 on how the U.S. 7th
Army and the British 8th Army may enter the Reserve Box.
A maximum of one German SCU may SR from the Reserve
Box to each fully supplied Wehrkreis non-urban, non-supply
source space per SR round.

12.5 SR and Nationality Specific Rules
The additional capabilities listed for the British and U.S. only
refer to use of SR to move SCUs from the Reserve Box.
BRITISH UNITS: British units may also SR onto any British
or Allied Beach Head or any Allied supply symbol outside the
Soviet Union. (Antwerp must be “opened” by the play of the
Clearing the Scheldt Event to be used.)

12. STRATEGIC
REDEPLOYMENT (SR)

U.S. UNITS: U.S. units may SR onto any U.S. or Allied Beach
Head, Naples (if controlled), or Antwerp (if open and controlled).

12.1 General Rules

SOVIET UNITS: Soviet LCUs may not SR if the Germans
control Moscow.

SR is used to move units long distances through friendly controlled territory or to and from the Reserve Box. Each SR Point
will SR one full or reduced strength SCU. It takes three SR
Points to SR one full or reduced strength LCU.

12.2 SR Procedure
SR may be split up among different nationalities and spaces as
a player sees fit. A player may SR some units from a space and
not others without any penalty. Units may SR from their space
to any other friendly supplied space by using regular lines connecting spaces or blue Sea Move SR connections (Exception:
12.3). The SR route between the two spaces may only enter
friendly controlled spaces, but any or all of the spaces may be
adjacent to enemy units. A unit may SR each time a player
plays an SR card, but no unit may SR more than once in each
Action Round.

AXIS UNITS:
• The Axis player may not use SR in the Soviet Union on turns
1-4.
• NORTH AFRICA LIMIT: The Axis player may not SR Panzer SCUs across Sea
Move SR connections to Tunisia or
Libya if two or more
Panzer SCUs are currently in French
North Africa (Algeria and Tunisia), Libya or Egypt. This is
judged at the instant the Panzer unit wishes to SR.
• TUNISIA: When Vichy enters the war, Axis units may SR to
Marseilles and into Tunis (17.3).

SEA MOVE SR CONNECTIONS: Only SCUs may use Sea
Move SR connections and must stop upon crossing.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

13. SUPPLY

13

space outside Libya, it would cost 2 OPS to activate (one for a
normal activation and one for being outside of Libya).

13.1 General Rules
Units must be in supply to perform most actions. There are two
types of supply—Full and Limited. Supply is determined at
the instant of activation (for movement, combat, SR or using
Replacement Points), during combat for the defender, and during the Attrition Phase for each side.
FULL SUPPLY: To be in Full Supply, units must trace supply
through any number of friendly controlled spaces to a supply
source across regular connectors.
LIMITED SUPPLY: Units are in Limited Supply if they can
only trace a supply line across a Sea Move SR line, or through
a space with an enemy Partisan marker, or they have no supply
line but occupy a friendly intact fort space.
NOTE: Units may not trace supply through an enemy controlled
space that contains no enemy Combat Units.
BEACH HEADS: Allied units tracing to a Beach Head are in
Full Supply within two spaces (one intervening space) of the
Beach Head and in Limited Supply beyond that.
LUFTWAFFE SUPPLY: Axis units under the Luftwaffe Supply marker go from OOS to Limited Supply. Note that Axis control of Malta or the Italian
Navy Sorties Event allows Axis units in North Africa to trace
Full Supply by sea to Tripoli/Tunis.

13.2 Supply Sources
AXIS: The supply sources for Axis units are The Ruhr, Breslau,
Berlin and the National Redoubt at Munich (if the event has
been played). Syracuse is a special Axis Limited Supply
source—it may be used for Limited Supply only. This means
that Axis units may not SR from the Reserve Box to Syracuse,
nor may they SR from Syracuse to the Reserve Box if Syracuse
is their only source of supply.
SOVIET: The supply sources for Soviet units are Sverdlovsk,
Chelyabinsk, and Basra. Soviet units may trace Full Supply to
Basra (but may not be placed there when entering the map).
Axis units may not enter or attack Chelyabinsk or Sverdlovsk.
WESTERN ALLIES: The Supply sources for the Western Allies are Suez, Alexandria, Basra, Naples (if Allied), and Antwerp
(if controlled and opened). British, Canadian and Commonwealth units may also trace to British or Allied Beach Heads.
U.S. and Free French units may trace to U.S. or Allied Beach
Heads. Allied units may only trace limited supply from Naples
into France.

13.3 Effects of Limited Supply
Units in Limited Supply may not SR to the Reserve Box. Units
in Limited Supply cost 1 OPS per unit to activate—this cost is
in place of any other cost. The full cost to activate the space
must be paid, or no units in the space may be activated. Unless
in Full Supply, the PanzerArmee Afrika LCU always adds one
to the Activation cost of any space outside of Libya.
EXAMPLE: If PanzerArmee Afrika was in Limited Supply in a

13.4 Out of Supply (OOS) Effects
13.41 General Rules: OOS units may not use SR. OSS units
may not take Replacements. They have their Movement Allowance reduced to 2 (if it was 3 or more) and mechanized
units are treated as non-mechanized for all purposes except for
elimination replacement from Reserve. They pay 1 OPS per
unit to activate in place of any other cost. If they are involved
in a combat, they cause a one column shift to the left for all
friendly units attacking or defending. The full cost to activate
the space must be paid, or no units in the space may be activated.
13.42 Trenches: OOS Soviet units may not entrench but they
may receive the benefits of trenches in their space. OOS German or Western Allied units do not receive the benefits of any
trench in their space (including the Tobruk, West Wall or Atlantic Wall trenches).
13.43 Combat Cards: OOS defending units may not receive
the benefit of any Combat Cards.
13.44 Attrition:
• SCUs which are OOS during their side’s Attrition Segment
are placed in the Eliminated Units Box.
• Non-Soviet OOS LCUs are eliminated and placed on the
Turn Record Track three turns from the current turn, while
a matching SCU is removed from the Reserve Box and
placed in the Eliminated Units Box. If there is no appropriate SCU in the Reserve Box, the LCU is permanently removed from the game.
• Soviet OOS LCUs are placed in the Eliminated Units Box
along with a matching SCU from the Reserve Box (there is
no three turn delay for Soviet LCUs). If there is no appropriate SCU in the Reserve Box, the LCU is permanently removed from the game.

13.5 Supply and Control Markers
During the Attrition Phase, any friendly
controlled space which does not contain a
friendly fort, and which if it were a friendly
combat unit would be eliminated for being OOS, becomes enemy controlled.

13.6 Axis Units in the Caucasus
Axis LCUs tracing supply through Maikop or Armavir or tracing supply across a Sea SR connection by way of Baku or
Batumi, cost 1 additional OP (per unit) to activate, up to a maximum of 5 OPs per space.

13.7 Malta
Allied units on Malta at the time the Herkules event is played
are removed and placed in the Eliminated Units Box. While
the Malta space is not affected by OOS considerations (requiring giving control to the Axis if OOS), if Allied units are placed
in the Malta space, they are subject to supply considerations.
The effects of Herkules are cancelled if the Allies retake Malta.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

14

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

14. REPLACEMENTS
14.1 Replacement Points
During the Replacement Phase, each nation can spend the number of Replacement Points (RPs) recorded on the General
Records Track by the nation’s RP marker. Replacement Points
can be spent to replace steps for on-map units, or they may be
used to recreate units in the Eliminated Units box. It cost 1/2
RP to replace an SCU step. It costs 1 RP to replace an LCU
step. An eliminated unit may be replaced to full strength in a
single Replacement Phase. RPs not spent during a Replacement Phase are lost—they may not be saved.
NATIONALITY RESTRICTIONS: British RPs may only be
spent to replace British, Canadian and Commonwealth steps.
U.S. RPs may be spent to rebuild U.S. and Free French steps.
German RPs may only be used to rebuild German steps, while
Axis RPs may be used to rebuild any non-German Axis steps.
Soviet RPs may only be used to replace Soviet steps.

14.2 Eliminated Units Box
Any Western Allied LCU eliminated while tracing supply to
Naples, Alexandria, Cairo or Basra, or beaches J-U is considered to have been eliminated in the Mediterranean Theater.
While in the Eliminated Box, place an Allied control marker
on them as a reminder of that status. Any Western Allied LCU
eliminated while tracing supply to any other supply source is
considered to have been eliminated in the Northwest European
Theater. Eliminated LCUs that can trace supply to either area
may be considered to be in Northwest Europe or the Med, Allied player's choice.
OOS LCUs: Western Allied LCUs eliminated Out of Supply
(13.4) may be placed in the Eliminated Units Box with or without a marker, regardless of where they were removed from,
after their three turn delay. The Allied player may choose to
eliminate LCUs that are in supply as if they were Out of Supply for the purposes of this rule.
SCUs: Western Allied SCUs are not marked with a control
marker when eliminated, regardless of the space they were
eliminated in.

14.3 Placement Guidelines
LCUs: Recreated LCUs may be placed in their home country
as if they were Reinforcements (see 7.62). Recreated Western
Allied LCUs may also be replaced at any eligible Beach Head
(although British units may not use the U.S. Beach Head and
vice versa), Naples if it is Allied, or at Antwerp if it is Allied
and the port has been opened by the play of the Clearing the
Scheldt Event.
SCUs: Recreated eliminated SCUs are always placed in the
Reserve Box.
RESTRICTIONS:
• Recreated Allied LCUs from Northwest Europe must be
placed at a Beach Head on beaches A through I or Antwerp
(if available), while LCUs replaced from the Mediterranean
may be place at any other eligible Home Country Full Supply source, Beach Head or Naples (if Allied controlled).

• The Desert Army may only be recreated at Basra, Alexandria or Suez.
• PanzerArmee Afrika may only be recreated at Tripoli or Alexandria (if not OOS).

14.4 Non-Replaceable Units
Units marked with a dot in the upper right hand corner, and
units that are permanently removed from the game may not
take replacements.

14.5 Special Rules
14.51 Soviet Southwest Front: The Soviet Southwest Front 5-3-4 is replaced in the Eliminated Units
Box with the Southwest Front 3-3-3 when eliminated.
14.52 German Panzer Replacement Limit: There is a maximum number of German Panzer steps (LCU or SCU) that may
be replaced apart from those replaced by the play of Events.
Before the Totaler Krieg Event is played, the German player
may replace a maximum of two Panzer steps per turn. This
level is increased to three starting the turn after the Totaler
Krieg Event is played.
14.53 Wehrkreis RPs: Before spending any accumulated replacements, the Axis player must subtract 1 GE RP for every
Wehrkreis space that is not in Axis control and/or not in Full
Supply. GE RPs may not be reduced below 0.
14.54 Voluntary Elimination: During the End of Turn Phase
the Allied player may choose to eliminate any British, French
or U.S. LCU in Full Supply. These are treated as if they were
eliminated OOS and placed on the turn record track three turns
later (so if they were removed during the Spring 43 End of
Turn Phase they would be placed on the Winter 44 turn). At the
start of that turn place them in the Eliminated Units Box—they
are now eligible to be returned via replacements. Allied LCUs
that are voluntarily eliminated in this manner do not require
removing a matching SCU from the Reserve Box.
14.55 Moscow: If Moscow is Axis controlled or the Stalin
counter is not currently in Moscow, all Allied RP cards played
have the listed number of Soviet RPs reduced by one (4 becomes 3, 2 becomes 1 etc.). These conditions are judged each
RP round.

15. WEATHER
15.1 Spring Thaw
Players may not play OPS cards during the first two rounds of
Spring Turns. They may take an ‘Automatic 1 OPS’, or Events
that double as OPS, unless otherwise noted on the card.

15.2 Winter 42
All effects of this rule are applicable only within the Soviet
Union.
During Winter ‘42 (unless von Paulus Pause was played), all
German units in the Soviet Union are treated as if they were
infantry units. This means that they do not have the abilities of

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin
mechanized units with regards to Advance after Combat, they
may not convert from a Move activation to a Combat activation, and they do not count as a mechanized unit for purposes
of a multi-space attack. Their movement allowance is not
changed, nor are they exempt from the limitations on Panzer
step replacements (14.52). German units also:
• are in Limited Supply (if not OSS) in Soviet Union spaces.
• suffer a 1L shift when firing on attack or defense.
• receive no terrain benefits on defense apart from trenches
and the Hedgehog Event No Retreat Option.
• are treated as infantry units.

15.3 Winter Invasions
No Allied invasions may take place during Winter Turns at
beaches A-I.

15

17. NEUTRALS
17.1 In General
There are four Neutrals in WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin—the
U.S., Vichy France, Turkey and Sweden.

17.2 U.S.
The U.S. enters the war on the Allied side by play of either the
Hitler Declares War or FDR Declares War Event cards. Until
the U.S. has entered the war, Reinforcement or Invasion cards
with U.S. units on them may not be played as Reinforcements
or Invasions. U.S. Replacements may not be accumulated until
the U.S. has entered the war. If the Axis Wolfpack event is played
before the U.S. enters the war, the Allied player may treat FDR
Declares War as a Yellow Event.

17.3 Vichy France

16. PARTISANS
16.1 In General
Only the Allied player may place Partisan Markers.
Partisans may be placed in the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, Greece and Turkey after the play of the Partisan Event. Partisans may be placed in France, Italy and Norway and Sweden after the play of the Maquis Event (to be placed
in Italy the Italy Defects Event must also have been played).

16.2 Partisan Placement
Partisan placement is taken as an automatic round requiring no
card play. In 1941-42 one Partisan marker may be placed each
time this activity is chosen, while in 1943-45 two Partisan markers may be placed each time this activity is chosen. Partisans
may only be placed in Axis controlled spaces not occupied by
an Axis unit. Once placed they are removed only by play of the
Partisan Sweep Event, if the Axis lose control of the space, or
if the Allied player chooses to remove them during the End of
Turn Phase. There may never be more than six (6) Partisan
markers on the board at one time.

Vichy France (including French North Africa) may not be entered by either side while Vichy France is neutral. Vichy France
enters the war at the first Allied invasion at beaches C-U. When
Vichy enters the war all its spaces remain neutral and there are
no Vichy forces. Both sides are free to enter Vichy territory—
including French North Africa—from this point on. Normally,
SRing into neutral spaces is prohibited, but in this case Axis
units may SR into Tunis (via Syracuse), and may SR into
Marseilles (any neutral space in mainland Vichy France the
unit passes through becomes Axis controlled).

17.4 Turkey and Sweden
Turkey and Sweden enter the war when either side attempts to
enter that nation. To declare war on Turkey or Sweden, simply
announce it at the start of the round. The other player may now
place and control that nation’s units as directed by the set-up in
Rule 20. Turkish and Swedish units are always in Full Supply
in their home countries. They may never leave but may attack
out of their home country. If Turkey is in the war it gets two
RP per turn regardless of RP Events played. There are no
Swedish RPs. Turkish LCUs may be replaced at Ankara or
Istanbul. Swedish units may not be replaced.

16.3 Partisan Effects
Partisan units prevent Axis SR into, out of, or through the space
in question. Axis units may only trace Limited Supply through
a Partisan space. Axis units may not retreat into a Partisan space
if another route is available. If forced to retreat into a Partisan
space, the Axis force must halt their retreat in that space. Axis
units defending in a Partisan space lose all normal defensive
terrain benefits (excluding Trenches). Unless occupied by an
Axis unit, a resource or VP space counts as Allied while a Partisan marker is present.

18. RESOURCES
18.1 In General
There are two types of Resources—Iron and Oil. Control of
these resource spaces affects the hand capacity of both the Axis
and Allied players.

18.2 Iron
If the Allied player controls both Iron spaces during the Draw
Strategy Card Phase, the Axis hand size is reduced by one. If the
Casablanca event has been played and Sweden is neutral, consider the Iron space in Sweden under Allied control for this rule.

18.3 Oil
AXIS: If the Axis player controls no Oil space in Full Supply,
his hand size is reduced by one. If the Axis player controls two
or more Oil spaces in Full Supply, his hand is increased by
one—to a maximum of eight. There is no additional advantage
to controlling all three Oil spaces.
© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

16

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

ALLIED: If the Allied player controls only one Oil space his
hand size is reduced by one. If he controls no Oil spaces his
hand size is reduced by two. If he controls all three Oil spaces
his hand size is increased by one, but never above eight.
NOTE: Axis Hand size may never fall below five, except during turns 16–18, when it may not fall below two (7.7).

19. NATIONAL RESTRICTIONS
19.1 Hungary

19.9 Soviet Union
Soviet units may not enter Egypt, Libya, Algeria, Tunisia, Palestine, Syria or Transjordan. British, U.S. and Free French units
may not enter the Soviet Union.

20. CAMPAIGN SCENARIO
20.1 Game Length
The Campaign Scenario begins with Turn 1 (June 41) and ends
with Turn 18 (Summer 45) or Automatic Victory (5.3).

Hungarian units may never enter Romania. The Hungarian 3rd
Army may not leave Hungary. Hungarian units may operate in
Hungary, the Soviet Union, and Yugoslavia only.

20.2 Set Up

19.2 Romania

Allied Setup
British

Romanian units may operate in Romania, the Soviet Union,
and Yugoslavia only.

The Allied Player sets up first. Units in brackets, e.g., [1st
Army], are set up reduced.

Bulgarian units may operate in Greece, Bulgaria, Turkey and
Yugoslavia only.

Basra:
Alexandria:
Cairo:
Buq Buq:
Tobruk:

19.4 Italy

Soviet Union

19.3 Bulgaria

Italian units may operate in Italy/Sicily, Yugoslavia, Albania,
Greece, Turkey, Tunisia, Algeria, Libya, Egypt, Palestine, Syria,
Trans-Jordan, and Iraq only. Exception: the Italian 8th Army
may only operate in the Soviet Union. If replaced by a corps,
the corps may operate in the Soviet Union but is not required
to remain there.

19.5 Germany
German LCUs may not operate in Italy/Sicily south of Bologna-La Spezia until the Achse Event is played. The note regarding ‘Achse’ on the player aid-card should also read La
Spezia instead of Livorno.

19.6 Yugoslavia
The YPA may only operate in or within one space of Yugoslavia. It is always in supply. If eliminated it may not be replaced
as there is no Yugoslav Corps to place in Reserve. If the Tito
Event has been played, Soviet units may not end their move in
Yugoslavia, but may freely move and trace supply. Soviet units
may attack Axis units in Yugoslavia from spaces adjacent to
Yugoslavia, and may (if they win that combat) advance after
combat into Yugoslavia. After Tito has been played, any Allied-controlled space in Yugoslavia that does not contain an
Allied unit does not convert to Axis control during the Attrition Segment for being OOS (exception to 13.5).

19.7 Britain

13 armies

Leningrad:
Kaunus:
Bialystok:
Lwow:
Gomel:
Mozhaisk:
Armavir:
Kishinev:
Moscow:
Reserve Box:

One each in Courland, Riga, Vitebsk,
Smolensk, Brest-Litovsk, Pinsk, Kovel,
Kolomyja, Tarnopol-Rovno, Chernovitsi,
Dnepropetrovsk, Sevastopol, Odessa
Leningrad Front
Northwest Front
Level-1 Trench, West Front
Level-2 Trench, Southwest Front (Mech)
Central Front
Reserve Front
Caucasus Front
Level-1 Trench, South Front
Stalin
5 armies

Axis Setup:
Italy
10 corps

Bir Hacheim:

One each in Genoa, Trieste, Naples, Palermo,
Taranto, Zagreb, Albania, Tripoli, Benghazi,
Gazala
1 mech [corps]

Hungary
Budapest:
Belgrade:
Cluj:

The British 1st Army may only operate in Malta, French North
Africa, Libya and Egypt, unless it is brought into play via the
Sledgehammer invasion card.

Bulgaria

19.8 Iran and Iraq

Yassi:
Galatz:
Bucharest:
Reserve Box:

There are no restrictions for either side regarding movement
into and through Iran or Iraq.

1 BR [corps]
1 CW [corps]
1 CW [corps]
1 BR corps, 1 CW corps
Trench-1, 1 CW corps

3 corps

3rd Army
1 corps
1 corps
One each at Sofia, Plovdiv, Salonika

Romania

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

3rd Army
4th Army
1 corps
2 corps

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin
Germany
Saar:
Stuttgart:
10 corps

West Wall Level-1 Trench
West Wall Level-1 Trench
One each in Brest, Holland, Trondheim,
Bergen, Oslo, Belgrade, Athens, Crete,
Masurian Lakes, Slovakia.
Occupied France:[1st Army], [7th Army] (unstacked)
Vienna:
[2nd Army], 1 Pz corps
Memel:
16th Army, 18th Army, 4th Pz Army
Insterberg:
3rd Pz Army, 9th Army
Warsaw:
4th Army, 2nd Pz Army, 1 corps
Lublin:
6th Army, 1st Pz Army
Tarnow:
17th Army
Yassi:
[11th Army]
Hellfire Pass:
1 Pz corps
Reserve Box:
4 corps, 4 Pz corps

Neutral Setup
Sweden
Stockholm:
Reserve Box:

1st Army
1 corps

17

Optional Rules
Design Note: The following rules are optional and intended
to help balance the game. Use as desired. Note that players
who want a more “historical” match at the cost of some
additional rules dirt should consider using them all.

Pro-Axis
• (7.62) Only one of the Allied Events #2 and #24 may be
played in 1941.
• (7.62) Regardless of when US Buildup is played, there
may be no Allied invasions before Summer 42.
• (15.4) “Sunny Italy”: Naples is considered an Allied Limited Supply source during Fall and Winter turns.

Pro-Allied
• (15.5) Time of Mud: On rounds 2 and 3 of the Fall 1941
turn, German Panzer units in the USSR have their Movement Allowance reduced to 3 and may advance only one
space after combat (using normal Mech Advance rules).
They are still treated as Mech units these rounds.

Turkey
Istanbul:
Ankara:
2 corps:
Reserve Box:

1st Army
2nd Army
Anywhere in Turkey
2 corps

CREDITS
Game Design: Ted Raicer
Dedicated to my late Uncles, Simon Raicer and Jack Turner.
Game Development: William F. Ramsay, Jr., Steve Kosakowski
Playtesting: Scott Cameron, Kevin Duke, Ananda Gupta, Matthew Hayes, Tom Kassel, Fred Manzo, Harvey Mossman, Tod
Reiser, Michael Rinella, Kris Weinschenker
Russian Spelling Assistance: Alla Hayes
Art Director: Rodger MacGowan
Cover Art, Package Design and Strategy Card Back Design:
Rodger B. MacGowan
Map, Cards & Counter Art: Mark Simonitch
Rules Layout: Mark Simonitch
Production Coordination: Tony Curtis
Producer: Tony Curtis, Rodger MacGowan, Andy Lewis,

Gene Billingsley and Mark Simonitch
Volunteer Proofreaders: Doug DeMoss, Ricky Gray, Jim
Ferguson, Steven E. Caler, Ananda Gupta, Michael Rinella, Mark
Guttag, Jared Scarborough, Richard deCastongrene, Asnadi Jamil,
Rich Shipley, Andrew Harding, Daniel Frederick

Questions?
If you have any questions about the rules, we’ll be glad to answer
them if you send them to the GMT address with a self-addressed,
stamped envelope. For faster response, we’re on the Internet at
www.gmtgames.com and at www.ConsimWorld.com, or send
email to ted.raicer@gmtgames.com or WFRamsay@aol.com.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

18

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

19

Clarifications
Cards
• Both Panzergruppe Guderian and Patton allow a second attack. A
first attack must have been made by 2nd Panzer Armee or 3rd Army
(respectively) in order for that unit to make the second attack. Both
require that the affected units are in Limited or Full Supply at the
instant of activation.
• OOS Panzers may not take replacements using the Panzer Refit card.
• Provisional Yellow Event cards (those cards without a Yellow box
that the rules allow to be played as Yellow events under certain circumstances) may not be played as Yellow Event cards during Spring
Thaw rounds, but may otherwise be played normally.
• Events which do not require attacks may still be played even if the
target of the event is already controlled by the player, e.g., Krim may
be played as an Event by the Axis player even if Sevastopol is already Axis controlled.
Additional Clarifications
• Nordlicht allows the Axis to attack Leningrad for the remainder of
the game. In the Round the card is played, only Leningrad may be
attacked by the Axis.
• Crete is part of Greece. Memel is part of Greater Germany. Iran and
Persia are the same thing. French North Africa includes Algeria and
Tunisia.
• The Axis controls all of Libya at the start of the game, with the exception of Tobruk. The Allied Player controls all of Egypt, Syria,
Persia, Palestine, Iraq and Trans-Jordan at the start of the game.

• Only German mechanized units count as Panzer units.
• In general, if enemy action reduces your hand limit next turn below
the number of cards you have remaining at the end of this turn, you
must discard to bring yourself down to the hand limit.
• Units are not required to exercise a No Retreat option if they have a
Stand Fast marker on them—it is optional. Prior to play of Bomb
Plot, the 1 VP cost for moving out from underneath a Stand Fast
marker is 1 VP, with the marker removed after paying the VP. For all
other purposes, the marker is not removed unless all units that began
the Action Round under the marker have moved, retreated, advanced
out of the space, or have been eliminated. After Bomb Plot is played,
the VP cost is 1 per German unit under the marker.
• Move markers are removed as each space is activated for Movement. Combat markers are removed as each Combat is resolved.
• Although not indicated on the U.S. Reinforcement cards, U.S. BuildUp must be played before any U.S. Reinforcements may be played
(and it is noted on the U.S. Build-Up card).
• The play of either FDR Declares War or Hitler Declares War as an
Event prevents play of the other as an Event.
• Axis Satellites may be played if Odessa and/or Kiev are occupied by
partisans.
• Sofia is the Capital of Bulgaria, Rome is the Capital of Italy, and
Bucharest is the Capital of Romania.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

20

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

Card List
TYPE: CC = Combat Card, D = Dual Action card, d = Dual Action Card if
Stalin is in Moscow. All other cards are regular Event cards.
Card #
OP Value Type

Event

Allied Blitzkrieg Cards
1. 4

TORCH*: Play after U.S. Build-Up. Beach Heads:
Allied and US Beaches: K-L, S BR 1st Army], two
US Corps. May not play after Sledgehammer.

2. 4

SOVIET REINFORCEMENTS*: Place Don,
Stalingrad, Steppe and Voronezh Fronts. Place four
Armies in Reserve Box.

3. 2 d

STAVKA: Cancels any Soviet Orders for this turn.

4. 4

SOVIET REINFORCEMENTS*: Place 1st–6th
Tank Armies on the map as if they were LCUs. Play
four or more turns after Industrial Evacuation.

5. 4

BRITISH REINFORCEMENTS*: Place Desert
Army in Alexandria, Cairo, or Basra. Place one CW
Corps in Reserve Box. Allows play of British 8th
Army (Card 21) on any following turn.

6. 4

7. 5 d

FDR DECLARES WAR*: This is considered a Yellow Event card if if Wolfpack has been played. May
be played after Summer 41. US Enters the war. Allows play of U.S. Build-Up.
INDUSTRIAL EVACUATION*: Allows play of
Soviet Tank Armies reinforcements (Card 4) four
turns later. Add one card to Allied Hand starting
eight turns later. May not be played if Moscow has
ever been occupied by an Axis unit.

16. 5

17. 2 CC ZHUKOV: +1 DRM for Soviet Offensive or Defensive Fire.
18. 2 CC T-34: +1 DRM for Offensive or Defensive Fire with
Soviet Mechanized unit.
19. 3

PARTISANS*: Allows placement of Partisan markers in the Soviet Union, Greece, Albania, and Yugoslavia. May immediately play one Partisan
marker.

20. 2 CC PARADROP: +1 DRM for Offensive Fire. May be
used once per turn only.
21. 4

BRITISH REINFORCEMENT*: Play any turn
following the turn U.S. Buildup is played. Replace
Desert Army (which must be on map in Full Supply) with 8th Army. Remove the Desert Army from
play.

22. 5 D

OPERATION URANUS*: +1 DRM for all Soviet
Attacks this round. May not play during Spring
Thaw.

23. 4

CLEARING THE SCHELDT*: May play if the
Allies control Antwerp. Allows Allied use of
Antwerp Supply.

24. 3

SOVIET REINFORCEMENTS*: Place Bryansk,
Kalinin, and Volkhov Fronts. Place three Armies in
Reserve Box.

25. 5 D

ENIGMA: The Axis Player must show the Allied
Player his hand. May not be played if the Allies
control any space in Greater Germany. May not play
during Spring Thaw.

8. 2 CC FORTIFIED BOXES: +1 DRM for Allied units defending in a Desert Space.
9. 4

SLEDGEHAMMER*: Play after U.S. Build-Up.
Beach Head: Allied Beaches: A-B, D [BR 1st Army],
two US Corps. May not play after Torch.

US BUILD-UP*: May play any turn after the turn
of US Entry (Hitler Declares War or FDR Declares
War). Allows play of Allied Invasions, US 8th Air
Force, US Reinforcements, BR 8th Army (Card 21)
on any following turns.

26. 5

BRITISH REINFORCEMENTS*: Place 1st Canadian Army. Place one CW Corps in the Reserve
Box.

10. 2 CC NKVD BOOSTS MORALE: +1 DRM for defending Soviet units.

27. 2

ITALY DEFECTS*: May play after the Allies control at least four spaces in Italy and/or Sicily. Remove all IT units from the game. All spaces in Italy/
Sicily not occupied by an Axis unit become Allied.

28. 2

US 8TH AIR FORCE: Play after US Build-Up.
Axis hand size reduced by 2 for the next Draw Strategy Cards Phase. If canceled by FW-190 add 1 VP.
Prior to play of P-51 Mustang may be played as an
Event in Allied Action Rounds 1–5 only.

29. 3 D

ROMANIA DEFECTS*: May be played if the Soviets control at least one space in Romania. Remove
all RO units from the game. All spaces in Romania
not occupied by an Axis unit become Allied. Place
one Soviet Army in the Reserve Box. Allows play
of Bulgaria Defects.

11. 3

SORGE*: Allows play of Siberians. May place
Move/Combat markers on two Soviet spaces.

12. 3

BOMBER COMMAND: Axis hand capacity reduced by two for the next Draw Strategy Card Phase.
Prior to Fall 44 may be played as an Event in Allied
Action Rounds 1–5 only.

13. 3 d

SIBERIANS*: Play after Sorge. Place 1st-5th
Shock Armies on the map as if they were LCUs.

14. 5

LEND-LEASE*: Allows play of Soviet Mechanized
Fronts (cards 31, 37 and 39) on any later turn.

15. 3 D

CASABLANCA*: May play if Allies control Oran
and Algiers, or Syracuse, and there are no Axis controlled spaces in Libya or Egypt. Treat all Neutral
spaces as Allied for VP purposes. (Subtract 1 VP
for each currently neutral VP space.)

Allied Total War Cards

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

21

30. 2 D

BULGARIA DEFECTS*: Play after Romania Defects. Remove all BU units from the game. All spaces
in Bulgaria not occupied by an Axis unit become
Allied. Place one Soviet Army in the Reserve Box.

45. 4

AVALANCHE*: Play after U.S. Build-Up. Beach
Head: Allied Beaches: N-S, U [US 5th Army] Place
one BR Corps in the Reserve Box. May not play if
US 7th Army is on the map.

31. 4 D

SOVIET REINFORCEMENTS*: Play after LendLease. Replace any four 2-step 3-3-3 Fronts in Full
Supply with the 1st–4th Ukrainian Fronts. Replaced
Fronts are removed from the game. OPS are expended after replacement. May not play during
Spring Thaw.

46. 3

SHINGLE*: This is considered a Yellow Event card
if played before Overlord. Play after U.S. Build-Up.
Beach Head: Allied • Beaches: K-U one US Corps,
one BR Corps May not play if US 7th Army is on
the map.

47. 2 D

32. 5 D

IX TAC-AIR: Play Spring/Summer only, after P51 Mustang. +1 DRM for all BR/US Attacks this
round.

THE BIG THREE*: Play after Casablanca if there
are no Axis controlled spaces in Africa, Syria, Persia, or Iraq. Subtract 1 VP

48. 2

33. 5

OVERLORD*: Play after U.S. Build-Up. Beach
Heads: BR & US, or 1 Allied Beaches: A-I BR 2nd
Army, US 1st Army Place one BR, two US Corps in
the Reserve Box. May not play before turn 13 or
after Round-Up.

BOMB PLOT*: Axis player must randomly discard one card from his current hand. Axis must now
pay 1 VP per unit (not space) to ignore Hitler Orders.

49. 2

HUSKY*: Play after U.S. Build-Up. Beach Heads:
BR & US, or 1 Allied Beaches: N-S, U [BR 8th
Army], [US 7th Army] Place one US Corps in the
Reserve Box.

MAQUIS*: Partisan markers may be placed in
France, Norway, Sweden, and Italy (after Italy Defects). May immediately play one Partisan marker.

50. 4

BAGRATION*: +1 DRM for all Soviet Attacks and
cancels all Axis No Retreat options this round
against Soviet attacks. May not play during Spring
Thaw.

ROUND-UP*: Play after U.S. Build-Up. Beach
Heads: BR and US Beaches: A-B,D-E [BR 2nd
Army], [US 1st Army] Place one BR, two US Corps
in the Reserve Box. May not play after Overlord.

51. 2 D

YALTA*: Play if Allies control all VP spaces in
Soviet Union and one or more in Greater Germany.
Cancels all Axis No Retreat options vs. US units
this round. Allows Thunderclap. Subtract 1 VP.

34. 5

35. 5 D

36. 3

ASW VICTORY*: Cancels future play of
Wolfpacks. Subtract 1 VP.

52. 4

37. 4 D

SOVIET REINFORCEMENTS*: Play after LendLease. Replace any three 2-step 3-3-3 Fronts in Full
Supply with the 1st–3rd Baltic Fronts. Replaced
Fronts are removed from the game. OPS are expended after replacement. May not play during
Spring Thaw.

ANVIL-DRAGOON*: This is considered a Yellow
Event card if played (as an invasion) after Overlord. Play after U.S. Build-Up. Beach Head: Allied
• Beaches: J [US 7th Army], [FF 1st Army] Place
one US, one FF Corps in the Reserve Box. May play
after Round-Up or Overlord.

53. 4

38. 3

US REINFORCEMENTS*: Place US 15th Army.
Place one US Corps in the Reserve Box.

39. 5 D

SOVIET REINFORCEMENTS*: Play after LendLease. Replace any three 2-step 3-3-3 Fronts in Full
Supply with the 1st–3rd Belorussian Fronts. Replaced Fronts are removed from the game. OPS are
expended after replacement. May not play during
Spring Thaw.

P-51 MUSTANG*: This is considered a Yellow
Event card if played before Overlord. Cancels future play of FW-190. Allows play of Operation
Strangle and IX Tac-Air.

54. 2

FINLAND WITHDRAWS*: If Soviets control
Leningrad, Tallinn, and Riga in Full Supply, Subtract 1 VP.

55. 5 D

PATTON: US 3rd Army may make a second attack
after completing a first attack. May advance a maximum of two spaces after second combat.

40. 3

US REINFORCEMENTS*: Place US 3rd Army.
Place one US Corps in the Reserve Box.

41. 3

US REINFORCEMENTS*: Place US 9th Army.
Place one US Corps in the Reserve Box.

42. 3

TITO*: Place YPA LCU in any space in Yugoslavia with a Partisan marker and no Axis units.

43. 3

OPERATION STRANGLE*: This is considered a
Yellow Event card if played before Overlord. Play
after P-51 Mustang. Axis units in France are in Limited Supply and No Axis SR in France thereafter.

44. 2

THUNDERCLAP*: Play after Yalta. Randomly
discard one Axis card from current hand.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

22

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

Card #
OP Value Type

Axis Blitzkrieg Cards
1. 5

2. 4

3. 2 D

4. 4

13. 3 D

KRIM*: Cancels Soviet fort combat effects for one
Attack vs. Sevastopol.

14. 5

FALL BLAU*: May play after Hitler Takes Command. Axis places five Combat markers in any Axis
occupied spaces (including multi-nationality
spaces). +1 DRM for all attacks vs. Soviet units this
round. Axis units may attack Stalingrad, Maikop,
and Armavir.

15. 3

WOLFPACKS: Allied hand size reduced by two
for the next Draw Strategy Card Phase. May not be
played after ASW Victory.

16. 5

SPEER*: Allows play of 5th Pz and 6th SS Pz
Armies and Final Production Surge Event. May not
play after Totaler Krieg.

17. 2

BANZAI!*: Play after Fall 41. Allied player removes two CW Corps from the map, Reserve Box,
or Eliminated Units Box, in that order.

Event

BARBAROSSA*: Play on Turn 1 only. Axis places
five Combat markers in any Axis occupied spaces
(including multi-nationality spaces). +1 DRM for
all German attacks vs. Soviet units this round. Cancels Soviet Trench No Retreat option and Def 1R
effect for entire turn. May not play if von Paulus
Pause has been played.
VON PAULUS PAUSE*: Play on Turn 1 only. Axis
player places 4 Combat markers in any Axis occupied spaces (including multi-nationality spaces).
Cancel Soviet Trench No Retreat effects this round.
Axis must take two consecutive 1 OPS Rounds before Round 5 of Turn 2. No combat vs. Soviet units
is allowed during these rounds. Cancels Winter 42
Effects. May not play if Barbarossa has been played.

18. 2 CC DEVIL’S GARDENS*: Treat Desert space as a
Mountain space for one Defensive Combat.

OKH CONFERENCE*: Allows Play of Taifun
without VP Penalty. May not be played as an Event
after Taifun has been played as an Event.

19. 3 D

TAIFUN*: Axis places four Combat markers in any
Axis occupied spaces (including multi-nationality
spaces). +1 DRM for all attacks vs. Soviet units this
round. Allows Axis attacks on Moscow. –1VP unless OKH Conference has been played.

LUFTWAFFE SUPPLY*: Place Luftwaffe Supply
marker on any OOS Axis units in one space. Units
in that space are in Limited Supply this turn for
Defense and Attrition only.

20. 2

KAMMHUBER LINE: Cancels effect of Bomber
Command played this turn. May not be played after
Turn 14.

21. 5

HERKULES*: Place an Axis Control marker on
Malta. May trace Full Supply by sea to Tripoli/
Tunis. May not be played if Allies control Benghazi
or Algiers. Actual occupation of these spaces is not
required.

22. 4

GERMAN REINFORCEMENTS*: Place Pz AA
at Tripoli. Remove one supplied Pz Corps in Libya/
Egypt to Reserve Box.

23. 4

AXIS SATELLITES*: May play if Axis controls
Kiev and Odessa in Supply. IT 8th Army to Odessa,
HU 2nd Army to Kiev.

24. 3

GERMAN REINFORCEMENTS*: Place one
Panzer Corps and one SS Panzer Corps in the Reserve Box.

25. 4 D

STUKA: May be played in Summer and Falls turns
1941–43 only. All GE attacks vs. Soviet units get
+1 DRM this round.

5. 4 D

PANZERGRUPPE GUDERIAN: May not be
played after Hitler Takes Command. 2nd Pz Army
may make a second attack this round after all combats have been completed. It may advance only one
space after this second combat. May not play during Spring Thaw.

6. 4 D

PANZER REFIT*: Flip any three reduced strength
Panzer units (Armies or Corps), that are in supply,
to their unreduced sides. No space containing an
affected Panzer unit may be activated this round.
May not play during Spring Thaw.

7. 5

HEDGEHOGS*: Place three Level-1 Trench markers in Full Supply spaces with GE Armies in the
Soviet Union. All GE units in the Soviet Union may
use the No Retreat Option this turn.

8. 2

HITLER DECLARES WAR*: May play after Summer 41. Add 1 VP US enters the war. Allows play of
Allied US Build-Up card.

9. 4

HITLER TAKES COMMAND*: Allows play of
Totaler Krieg, Fall Blau, Zitadelle, Wacht am Rhein
Events. Prevents play of Panzergruppe Guderian.
Add +2 DRM to Axis Order rolls.

10. 2 CC DESERT FOX: +1 DRM for any GE Pz unit(s) attacking into or defending in a Desert space.
11. 3

ITALIAN NAVAL SORTIE: Axis units may trace
Full Supply across SR lines to Tripoli/Tunis this
turn. May place one Combat or Move marker.

12. 3 D

NORDLICHT*: Axis units may attack Leningrad.
Axis units may only attack Leningrad this round.
May not play during Spring Thaw.

Axis Total War Cards
26. 5

TOTALER KRIEG!*: Play after Hitler Takes Command. If Axis VP 11+ add 20 VP. Axis may no longer
win an Automatic Victory. Panzer Replacements
limit increases to three.

27. 3

FALL ZITADELLE*: Play after Hitler Takes Command. Axis places two Combat markers in any Axis
occupied spaces. Soviets +2 DRM for Defensive
Fire. Add 1 VP if German Panzer Army advances to
capture any space in the Soviet Union occupied by
two or more LCUs this round. Subtract 1 VP if no
such advance is made.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

23

28. 2 D

SKORZENY*: Play after Achse or Allies control
Rome. Add 1 VP.

41. 3 CC PANTHER: +1 DRM Offensive or Defensive fire
with GE Pz Units.

29. 2

FW-190: Cancels effect of 8th Air Force played this
turn. Add 1 VP. May not be played after P-51 Mustang. May only be played if U.S. 8th Air Force has
been played in the same turn.

42. 3 CC TIGER: +1 DRM Defensive fire with GE Pz Units.
43. 3 CC PANZERFAUST*: One Attacking Soviet mechanized unit takes a step loss before resolving combat.

30. 2 CC KESSELRING: +1 DRM for Defensive Fire for GE
units in Italy/Sicily.

44. 2 CC VOLKSSTURM*: +1 Defensive Fire in any space
in Greater Germany.

31. 4 D

ACHSE*: Play after Allies control Messina or invade at Beaches M, O, R, or T. German LCUs may
now operate in Italy/Sicily south of Bologna/La
Spezia. Allows Skorzeny.

45. 4

VERGELTUNGS-WAFFE*: Add 1 VP.

46. 3 D

MANSTEIN*: Cancels any Axis Orders this turn.

32. 5

GERMAN REINFORCEMENTS*: Place [10th
Army] and [14th Army]. Place two Corps in the
Reserve Box.

48. 2 CC HEINRICI: +1 DRM for Defensive Fire for any
GE unit vs. Soviet Attackers.

33. 5

GERMAN REINFORCEMENTS*: Place [15th
Army] and [19th Army]. Place two Corps in the
Reserve Box.

34. 5

GERMAN REINFORCEMENTS*: Place 8th
Army. Place one Corps in the Reserve Box.

45. 5

GERMAN REINFORCEMENTS*: Play after
Speer. Place [5th Pz Army]. Place one Pz Corps in
the Reserve Box.

36. 5

GERMAN REINFORCEMENTS*: Play after
Speer. Place 6th SS Pz Army, Place one SS Pz Corps
in the Reserve Box.

37. 4

GERMAN REINFORCEMENTS*: Place 1st FJ
Army.

47. 2 CC MODEL: +1 DRM Defensive Fire any GE unit.

49. 2 CC WEICHS*: + 1 DRM for Offensive Fire for GE
units vs. Soviet Units.
50. 4 D

FOREIGN ARMIES EAST*: Allied player must
reveal any of Cards: 2–4, 13, 17, 24, 31, 37, 39 in
his Hand. At the end of the turn he must reveal any
unplayed cards. May not play during Spring Thaw.

51. 2

ANTI-PARTISAN SWEEP: Remove two Partisan
markers.

52. 4

FINAL PRODUCTION SURGE*: Play after Speer
and before Turn 15. Flip any three reduced Pz
Armies to full strength side. Axis gets an automatic
seven card hand next turn. Beginning next turn,
eliminated Pz units may not be rebuilt.

53. 4

WACHT AM RHEIN*: Play in Fall/Winter turn
after Hitler Takes Command. Axis places four Combat markers in any Axis occupied spaces (including
multi-nationality spaces). Any attacks this round by
5th Pz and 6th SS Pz Armies get +2 DRM vs. NonSoviet units.

38. 3

ATLANTIC WALL*: Place a Level-1 Atlantic Wall
Trench in any two spaces connected to Beaches A–
I. May not be played after Round Up or Overlord.

39. 5

EAST WALL*: Place three Level-1 Trench markers in any spaces in the Soviet Union containing a
GE Army in in Full Supply.

54. 2

ANTI-PARTISAN SWEEP: Remove two Partisan
markers.

THE BUNKER*: May not be played after National
Redoubt. Place a Level-1 Trench on Berlin.

55. 3

NATIONAL REDOUBT*: May not be played after The Bunker. Place the National Redoubt Supply
marker in Munich. It now counts as a normal Axis
Supply Center for ALL purposes.

40. 3

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

24

WWII: Barbarossa to Berlin

Abbreviated Sequence of Play
A. Orders Phase: Each player rolls on his Orders Table (except Turn 1). The Axis player rolls and implements
first. Move the Orders marker to the correct box on the appropriate Orders Track.

B. Action Phase
ACTION ROUND 1: Each player is allowed to take one action. The Axis player conducts the first Action in
each Round. Each player must take one of three possible actions:

• PLAY STRATEGY CARD: Play a Strategy Card as an OPS, SR, RP, or Event (Rule 7).
• AUTOMATIC 1 OPS: Use one Activation Point for an Operation without the play of a Strategy Card (7.3).
• PLACE PARTISAN OPERATION (Allied player only): 1941–1942, place one Partisan marker; starting
in 1943 two Partisan markers may be placed (16.2).
If Strategy Card is played as an OPS:

1. ACTIVATION STEP: Spend Activation Points equal to the OPS/SR Value of the card to activate a space for
either movement or combat (never both). As each space is activated, place a Move or Combat marker (7.3).

2. MOVEMENT STEP: Move any units in spaces marked with a Move marker (Rule 10).
3. COMBAT STEP: Conduct any combats from spaces marked with a Combat marker (Rule 11).
• If Strategy Card is played as an SR: Spend the SR Points to move SCUs and/or LCUs (Rule 12).
• If Strategy Card is played as an RP: Mark the number of RPs on the General Records Track (Rule 14).
• If Strategy Card is played as an Event: The instructions on the card must be followed (7.6).

ACTION ROUNDS 2–6: Identical to Action Round 1.

C. Axis and Allied Attrition Segments
Note that the Axis Attrition Segment takes place immediately upon the conclusion of the 6th Axis Action Round and
the Allied Attrition Segment takes place immediately upon the conclusion of the 6th Allied Action Round (6.C).
• ATTRITION: Units are checked for attrition (13.44)
• LCUs/TRT: LCUs on the TRT (eliminated 3 turns earlier) are placed in the Eliminated Units box (13.44).
• DETERMINE CONTROL: Control of spaces behind enemy lines may change (13.5).
• BEACH HEAD REMOVAL: If no Allied unit can trace supply to a Beach Head marker (whether they need
to or not), that Beach Head marker is removed from the map (6C).

D. Replacement Phase
1. ALLIED SEGMENT: The Allied player spends his RPs (Rule 14).
2. AXIS SEGMENT: The Axis player spends his RPs (Rule 14).

E. Draw Strategy Card Phase
1. DISCARD: Players discard any unused cards they do not wish to hold for the following turn (7.9).
2. DRAW: Each player draws cards from his Draw Pile to bring his hand to seven cards. Note that this hand size
may be increased or decreased by control of Resource spaces as well as the play of Events (7.7, Rule 18).

H. End of Turn Phase
1. VOLUNTARY ELIMINATION: The Allied player may eliminate any fully supplied British, French or U.S.
LCUs, placing them on the turn record track three turns ahead (as if they had been eliminated OOS) (14.54).

2. VOLUNTARY REMOVAL OF BEACH HEADS AND TRENCHES: Either player may remove any
Beach Heads (Allies only) or Trenches they control.

3 REMOVE STAND FAST MARKERS
4. VICTORY DETERMINATION: Check for Automatic Victory (5.3) and if this is a Winter turn the Axis
player checks for control of VP spaces in the Soviet Union, Egypt and Iraq (5.2)

5. ADVANCE TURN MARKER

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

GMT Games, LLC • P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308 • www.GMTGames.com

