Spice Road

Setup

Cinnamon

2nd player
1st player

Cardamom

Sa

Tumeric

4th player

3rd player

Setup:
5. Spices are represented by wooden cubes. Sort them by color
1. Shuffle the orange-backed scoring cards and form a stack. A
Place five of these cards face-up in a row next to the stack. B
and place them in the spice bowls.
2. Put twice as many gold coins as there are players playing
Note: Put the filled bowls in ascending order of their value
above the leftmost scoring card. C Place the same number
as stocks on the table G : yellow (turmeric) ►red (saffron)
of silver coins above the second card from the left. D
►green (cardamom) ► brown (cinnamon).
3. Among the purple-backed trader cards there are 10 starting cards
6. Take as many caravan cards (gray back) as players are playing,
with a violet frame on the front. E Each player

receives a "2 Tumeric" (yellow) and a conversion
card as a starting hand. Return the other
starting cards back to the box.

2 Tumeric

Conversion

4. Mix the remaining purple-backed trader cards and form a
face-down stack. E Place six of these cards face-up the left
of the pile in a row. F

Gameplay

Century is played over several rounds.
Each player performs one action each turn
(turns move clockwise, starting with the start player).
When it is your turn, do one of the following actions:

Play a card: Play a card from your hand.
Acquire: Get a new trader card.
Rest: Take all the cards you’ve played back into your hand.
Score: Claim a score card.

including the one market with the purple start
player symbol. Mix the cards and give each player a card. H
The player with the symbol on their card is the start
player. The player sequence is clockwise.
7. Each player receives the following spices and places them
on their caravan.
► Start player: 3 turmeric
► 2nd and 3rd players: 4 turmeric each
► 4th and 5th players: 3 turmeric and 1 saffron each

Play a card
To play a hand card, place it face-up in front of you
and trigger its effect. There are three types of trader
cards that you can play:
Spice card
If you play a spice card, take the
number of spices of the appropriate
color(s) A from the stock and place
them on your caravan. In the example
shown, the player places 1 turmeric
and 1 saffron on his caravan.

Conversion cards
If you play a conversion card, you may convert
spices on your caravan into the next most
valuable spice (i.e. yellow (turmeric) ► red
(saffron)► green (cardamom) ► brown (cinnamon))
the number of times depicted on the card. You do
not have to execute all conversions that are
possible according to the card. In the illustrated
example, you were allowed to turn a yellow turmeric
into a red saffron and do the same again, or convert the
converted saffron into a green cardamom.

Order of the spices conversion

Exchange cards
If you play an exchange card, put the spices above
the arrow A from your caravan back into
their bowls, and take the spices shown under
the arrow B out of the stock and place them
on your caravan. You may carry out the
same exchange as many times as you wish in your
train as long as you have the necessary spices.
Example: Tom has 6 turmeric and plays a card
with which he can exchange 2 turmeric for
1 cardamom. He can now exchange 2, 4, or 6 turmeric
for 1, 2, or 3 cardamom.

Acquire card
To acquire a trader card, you must place a spice of your
choice from your caravan onto each card to the left of
the one you wish to acquire, then place any spices
already on your selected trader card into your caravan
and pick up the card and put it into your hand.
Note: The card on the far left you can acquire for free.

Rest
When you are resting, you take all
the cards that you have played before
back into your hand. (This allows you to
expand your hand over the course of the
game, i.e. to operate a kind of "deckbuilding").

Score
To take a scoring card, you must have all of the
depicted spices on your caravan. Put these spices
back into their bowls, take the scoring card and
place it in front of you. Slide the scoring cards so
that the resulting gap closes and a free space is
created on the right side of the row. Draw the top
card from the deck and place it in the free space.
If you take the first or second point card from the
left, take 1 gold or silver coin from above it. If you
have taken the last gold coin, move the remaining
silver coins from above the second card above
the first card.

Caravan limit

At the end of your turn, if you have more spices
on your caravan than you can transport, you must
return spices of your choice into the bowls until
your upper limit is reached.
A caravan can transport up to 10 spices.

Spice limit
The spice stock is not limited. If a bowl is emptied,
use another material or a multiplier as a
replacement.

Game End
If a player has his fifth point card
(with 2 or 3 players, his sixth), the game ends after
the current round. Each player earns the points on
their scoring cards. In addition, each gold coin is
worth 3 points, each silver coin is worth 1 point
and all spices better than turmeric(yellow) earn 1
point per wooden cube. The player with the most
points wins the game. In the case of a tie, the
player who was later in turn order wins.

About
Example: Tom would like to acquire the 4th trader card from
the left A so he places one spice on each card to the
left of it. B

Author: Emerson Matsuuchi
Note:
These are not official English rules. I’ve made this using

Slide the trader cards so that the resulting space is closed and the translation done by Jeremy Heilman, and my basic
a free space is created on the right side of the train stack.
knowledge of Illustrator. I needed the rulse as we inteded
Draw the top card from the deck and place it in the free space. to give this game as a present to our friend Boris.
Happy birthday! :)

