“Papa, where do crystal golems come from?”
“The great masters craft them using soul crystals.”
“Oh… but where do soul crystals come from?”
“From all over the world. They are very rare.
Legend says, they are the souls of people who died
long before the first humans came to Carvania.”
“Well, when I grow up, I’m going to be a crystal trader!
I’ll travel the whole world and I’ll find the very best
crystals and the masters will make great big
powerful golems from them, like the Gatekeeper!”

Golem edition

Game Setup
I

G

C

D

A
I

H

19

20

9

1st player

8

H

12

2nd player

B

H

H

I

4th player

To set up a game of Century, follow these steps in order:

F

1. Shuffle the Point cards (Golem back) to form a deck  A  ,
then draw 5 cards and place them face up in a row to the
left of that deck B .
2. Place a pile of copper tokens equal to the number of
players x2 above the first (leftmost) Point card C .
Then place a pile of silver tokens equal to the number of
players x2 above the second Point card D .
3. Among the Merchant cards (Crystal back) E ,
there are 10 cards with a purple border
on the face up side. These are the starting
cards. Among them, each player gets
one ‘Create 2’ and one ‘Upgrade 2’ card
to form their starting hand, as shown here.
Any remaining starting cards are returned
Create 2
into the box.

Upgrade 2

E

I
3rd player

5. Separate the crystals by color and place them into their
diamond-shaped bowls G . Note: Make sure the order of
the colored crystals matches the order shown above:
Yellow Green Turquoise Magenta.
6. Take a Caravan card (brown back) for each player in the
game, being sure to include the card with the first player
, shuffle them and deal each player one
symbol on it
card in front of them H . The player with the
symbol on
his Caravan card is the first player.
7. Place yellow and green crystals according to the table below
on each player’s Caravan card I .
1st player gets 3 yellow crystals
2nd player gets 4 yellow crystals
3rd player gets 4 yellow crystals
4th player gets 3 yellow crystals and 1 green crystal
5th player gets 3 yellow crystals and 1 green crystal

4. Shuffle the remaining Merchant cards to form a deck  E .
Draw 6 cards and place them face up in a row to the left
of that deck F .

Taking a Turn

Play

Century is played over a series of rounds. Each player will
take one turn each round (starting with the first player
and going clockwise).

To play a card from your hand, place the card face up
in front of you and execute the card’s effect. There are
3 types of Merchant cards that can be played in this way:

On a player’s turn, he must perform 1 of the
following actions:

Crystal Cards

Play: Play a card from his hand
Acquire: Acquire a Merchant card
Rest: Take all previously played cards
back to his hand
Claim: Claim a Point card

When playing a Crystal card, take the
number and color of crystal(s) shown on J
the card J from the diamond-shaped
bowls and place them on your caravan.
In this example, a player would place
1 green crystal and 1 yellow crystal on his caravan.

Upgrade Cards

Rest

When playing an ‘Upgrade 2’ card, you
MAY upgrade a crystal on your caravan
1 level and then upgrade a crystal 1 level
again. It is not mandatory to upgrade all
crystals from an Upgrade card. For example,
you may upgrade a yellow crystal to a green
crystal and then upgrade another yellow
crystal to a green crystal, or you can upgrade a yellow
crystal to a green crystal and then upgrade that green
crystal to a turquoise crystal.

To rest, take all of the cards you played face up in
front of you back into your hand. This allows players
to build their Merchant cards hand as the game evolves;
a mechanism called “hand-building”.

Claim
To claim a Point card, you must have all of the crystals
shown on the Point card in your caravan. Return those
crystals to the diamond-shaped bowls. Take the Point card
and place it face down in front of you. After claiming a
Point card, fill the empty slot by sliding the cards to the
left, creating an empty slot just to the left of the point
deck; then draw a card from the deck to fill that empty
slot. If you claim the leftmost or second leftmost Point
card, take one copper or silver token from above that card.
If you take the last copper token, slide the pile of silver
tokens so it is now above the leftmost Point card.

Crystal upgrade levels

Trade Cards
When playing a Trade card, return the
number and color of crystal(s) shown
above the arrow K from your caravan
to the diamond-shaped bowls, then take
the number and color of crystal(s) shown
below the arrow L from the bowls and add
them to your caravan. A trade can be done
any number of times in a row as long as
you have the appropriate crystals available.

K

Caravan Limit
A player’s caravan can hold up to 10 crystals.
At the end of a player’s turn, if that player has more than
10 crystals on his caravan, he must return the exceeding
crystals of his choice to the diamond-shaped bowls.

L

Crystal Limit

Example: Chris has 6 yellow crystals and plays a Trade
card that allows him to trade 2 yellow crystals for
1 blue crystal. Chris may trade 2, 4, or 6 yellow crystals
for 1, 2, or 3 blue crystals.

The crystal supply is not limited. If a supply is exhausted,
use a substitute material (e.g. players run out of yellow
crystals and use candy to track additional yellow crystals).

Game end

Acquire
To acquire a Merchant card, first pay for it by placing
ANY crystals from your caravan on each Merchant card
to the left of the card you are acquiring and then take that
Merchant card into your hand.
Note: When acquiring the leftmost Merchant card,
no crystals are placed. The card is for free.

Once a player has taken his fifth Point card (or sixth in
a 2-3 player game), the game will end after players finish
out the current round of play. At that point, each player
counts all his points on his Point cards, his copper/silver
tokens, and the remaining crystals on his caravan. Each
copper token is worth 3 points. Each silver token is worth
1 point. Each non-yellow crystal is worth 1 point.
The player with the most points wins. If there is a tie,
the last player to take a turn wins the tie.

Credits

M

N
Example above: Chris wants to acquire the fourth
Merchant card in the row M , so he places 1 crystal on each
of the 3 cards to the left of it N .
When acquiring a Merchant card and placing it in your
hand, any crystals that were on that card are placed on
your caravan. After acquiring a Merchant card, fill the
empty slot by sliding the cards to the left, creating an
empty slot just to the left of the merchant deck; then draw
a card from the deck to fill that empty slot.

Game Designer: Emerson Matsuuchi
Producer: Sophie Gravel
Art Direction: Philippe Guérin
Illustrations: Justin Chan & Chris Quilliams
Graphic Designer: Philippe Guérin & Karla Ron
Coordination: Geneviève Blouin
Foreign Affairs: Andrea Ahlers & Katja Wienicke
Editing: Sophie Gravel
Communications: Lyne Bouthillette
Marketing: Martin Bouchard
Development by:
PLAN

GAMES

© 2017 Plan B Games Inc.
No part of this product may be reproduced
without specific permission.
19 rue de la Coopérative, Rigaud, QC.
J0P 1P0, Canada.
Made in China.

