Cerebria - The Inside World - Rules
Component list
1 x Main Board
8 x Spirit Boards
2 x Fortitude Dials (1 x Bliss, 1x Gloom)
1 x Origin Wheel
8x Plastic Standees
8x Spirit die-cut tiles (4 x Bliss, 4 x Gloom)
72 x Mild Emotion cards (2 x Brightness, 6 x Bleakness, 32 x Bliss, 32 x Gloom)
36 x Strong Emotion cards (16 x Bliss, 16 x Gloom)
10 x double-sided Realm Action tiles (5 x Bliss, 5 x Gloom)
24 x “+1 Intensity” marker tokens (12 x Bliss, 12 x Gloom)
32 x Spirit Upgrade Tokens (in 4 different Vibes, 16 x Bliss, 16 x Gloom)
5 x Double-sided Frontier Control Tokens
5 x Double-Sided Realm Control Rings
4 x Meditation Tokens (2 x Bliss, 2 x Gloom)
21 x Aspiration cards (7 x Bliss, 7 x Gloom, 7 x Common)

6 x Bliss Identity Minor Fragments
3 x Bliss Identity Major Fragments
1 x Bliss Identity Top Piece
6 x Gloom Identity Minor Fragments
3 x Gloom Identity Major Fragments
1 x Gloom Identity Top Piece

80 x Willpower
20 x Bliss Essence (red)
20 x Gloom Essence (blue)
2x Player Aid

2x Emotion Guide (Bliss, Gloom)

Game Overview
In Cerebria, players play as Spirits, powerful entities representing Bliss or Gloom, the two
opposing primal forces of the Inside World. At the beginning of the game, Cerebria is young: it’s
nothing but a blank slate, but as the game progresses, its Identity will begin to develop. Using
the Willpower granted by the Origin, the Inside world’s creative force, the Spirits’ Aspiration is to
shape this forming identity to either Bliss’ or Gloom’s image. They achieve this by invoking
opposing Emotions across Cerebria to exert control over the world in various ways, and gather
enough Intensity by the time a Revelation comes, and the Identity develops further. The game is
won by the side with more influence over the fully grown Identity, thus becoming the dominant
force on Cerebria.

Game Component Overview
Before the detailed explanation of the gameplay, let’s take a closer look at Cerebria and its
denizens by going through the most important game
components and concepts.
Origin
Origin is the source of all energy in Cerebria,
bestowing the Spirits with the necessary Willpower to
take their Actions. It is also the cradle of Cerebria’s
forming Identity - but whether that Identity ultimately
represents Bliss or Gloom is only up to the Spirits.
Origin bestows Willpower to the Spirits from its five
spheres. If any of these Spheres is emptied, a
Revelation occurs, and the Identity continues to grow.

Cerebria’s Identity
Cerebria’s Identity is built from the ground
up over the course of the game, and
represents the Spirits’ efforts in shaping
the Inside World to the image of either
Bliss or Gloom. The Identity consists of
multiple Fragments, belonging to either Bliss or Gloom. These Fragments are added during
events called Revelations, and represent the state of Cerebria at the time of that Revelation.

These are key moments in the game: Cerebria’s state is in constant flux, but the Fragments are
permanent imprints of a game state during a Revelation. At the end of the game, the final
composition of the Identity will determine whether
Bliss or Gloom has won the game.
The Spirits
Cerebria’s Spirits are the shapers of the Inside
World, and as such, the characters controlled by
the players. They are affiliated with either Bliss or
Gloom, and strive to shape Cerebria to their
image. They do that by moving around
Cerebria’s Realms, invoking, empowering and
quelling Emotions, and triggering Revelations.

The Emotions
Emotion cards are manifestations of the
Spirits’ actions on Cerebria. They are
drawn from each Spirit’s own Emotion
deck over the course of the game, and
their primary role is to occupy Emotion
slots on the main board, and thus
contributing to controlling Cerebria’s
Realms and Frontiers (see “The Main
Board”). They can also be discarded to
upgrade your Spirit’s Actions (see “Spirit
Board Actions”).
There are two types of Emotion cards:
Mild and Strong. Each player’s deck
consists of Mild Emotions, but during the
game they can be upgraded to their Strong counterparts by intensifying them (see “Main Board
Actions”).
The most important attributes of an Emotion card are its
Intensity (numeric values printed on the card) and its
Vibe (red, yellow, blue or green symbol). The higher
Intensity an Emotion has, the more efficient it is in
controlling the Realm and/or Frontier it is on. An
Emotion’s Vibe represents its subtype within Bliss or
Gloom, and is important when upgrading your Spirit
Actions, and during Quelling (see “Spirit Board Actions“).

Emotions can occupy main board slots only as long as they have at least one Essence
nurturing them.
As soon as the last Essence is removed from an Emotion on the board, it is discarded, and a
new Emotion is drawn by its owner. Emotions can host more than one Essence, and their
Intensity value is always equal to the value associated with their rightmost non-empty Essence
slot.
Essence
Essence is the life force required to sustain the Emotions, Cerebria’s inhabitiants. It is obtained
primarily by using the Harvest Essence Action, but it can be obtained from the Origin as well in
smaller quantities. It is needed to invoke Emotions on the main board, and to Intensify them
(see “Main Board Actions”).
Gloom

Willpower
Willpower is the driving force behind the Spirits’ Actions. It is
gained primarily from the Origin’s Spheres during each Spirit’s
Meditation Action, but there are other ways to gain Willpower
as well. It is used to take Actions, as each Action has an
associated Willpower cost. Spent Willpower is always placed
into the general reserve.
Fortitude
To take an Action during their turn, Spirits have to spend one
Fortitude. Fortitude is reset at the end of each Round, and is
measured on a dial. It is shared between allied Spirits - if it is
spent, that side’s Action phase is over for the round. The
amount of available Fortitude increases by one in each
subsequent Round, but other game effects may also influence it.
The Fortitude dial is also used as a turn counter (the smaller
dial).

Bliss

The Main Board
Cerebria’s main board depicts the Inside World,
with its five Realms: the Valley of Motives, the
Willow of Values, the Network of Thoughts, the
Cradle of Senses, and the Land of Desires.
Each of these Realms can be controlled by
either Bliss or Gloom during the game, which
lowers the Willpower cost of Actions associated
with that Realm.
The five Realms have five Frontiers between
them, which can also be controlled - this allows
adjacent Spirits to take more Willpower from
the Origin during with Meditation Action.

The Spirit Board
The Spirit Board shows four Actions
associated with your Spirit. These can be
made more efficient in a variety of ways by
discarding Emotions. The Spirit Board also
shows the artwork and a special ability of
each Spirit - a detailed explanation of these
Abilities can be found in the Appendix.

Important Game Concepts
Before delving deeper into Cerebria’s rules, it is important to clarify two concepts that are
frequently used in this rulebook: Control and Adjacency.

Control
The term Control is used for the Main Board’s Realms and Frontiers. The Main board has a total
of 5 Realms, and 5 Frontiers between them. These are defined by their Emotion slots.
Each Frontier consists of 3 Frontier slots

Each Realm consists of 2 Realm slots

The Control of a Realm or Frontier always depends on the total Intensity of Bliss or Gloom
Emotions influencing that Realm or Frontier - at all times, the side with the higher total Intensity
controls it. If the influencing Intensities are tied, the Realm or Frontier is neutral, controlled by
neither side. Control changes immediately as soon as the total Intensity tips over in either side’s
favor.
Frontier Influence and control is simple:
all Emotions on a Frontier are influencing
it (up to three). Simply compare the total
Bliss and Gloom Intensity on these
Emotions - if one is higher, mark the
Frontier with a Frontier Control token with
the respective side up. The Frontier
Control Token also shows that adjacent
friendly Spirits are eligible to take 1 more
Willpower during their Meditation Action
(See “Spirit Actions”).

Realm Influence and control is a bit trickier.
All Emotions on a Realm’s two slots are
influencing it at all times, but Emotions on the
Frontier slots adjacent to these Realm slots
also Influence the Realm, as long as the
adjacent Realm slot is not occupied by an
Emotion of the other team. This makes the
middle Frontier slots a good place to influence
two realms at once - until the influencing
Emotion gets surrounded by Emotions of the
other team, essentially “locking it out” from
influencing the adjacent Realm.
Realm control can be marked both by the
double-sided Realm Control rings around the
Realm’s icon, and by flipping the Realm Action
tiles in front of the players - these tiles also
show the actual Willpower cost of the Realm’s
associated Action, as it is cheaper for the
controller.
Since Realm and Frontier control affects the
Spirits’ Willpower income and action costs, we
advise both teams to pay attention to the
Control markers, and keep them up to date at
all times.

Adjacency
The term Adjacency is used in a variety of ways in Cerebria, mostly in relation with the Spirits.
Spirits can be adjacent to other Spirits, Emotion slots, Frontiers and Origin Spheres. As a
general rule, Spirits can only interact with Emotions and Origin Spheres if they are adjacent to
them.
Adjacency to other Spirits:
● A spirit is adjacent to another Spirit if its Spirit slot is directly connected to another
Spirit’s slot.
Adjacency to Emotion Slots and Frontiers
● On Spirit Slots next to the Origin, a Spirit is adjacent to one Frontier, and one Emotion
slot (the middle one of the adjacent Frontier).
● On the Spirit slot of a Realm, a Spirit is adjacent to two Frontiers, and two Emotion slots.

Spirit Slot next to the Origin

Spirit Slot of a Realm

Adjacency to Origin Spheres
● On Spirit Slots next to the Origin, a Spirit is adjacent to two Origin Spheres (it can
choose one to take Willpower from during its Meditation Action).
● On the Spirit slot of a Realm, a Spirit is adjacent to one Origin Sphere.
Spirit Slot next to the Origin

Spirit Slot of a Realm

Adjacency of Emotion Slots
● An Emotion slot is always considered adjacent to the two nearest Emotion slots (a
Realm slot is always adjacent to a Frontier slot, and the other slot of the same Realm).

Game setup
Note: The following setup and rules explain the standard four-player base game of Cerebria. For
rules with different player numbers and advanced play modes, refer to the Appendix .
Place the main game board in the middle of the table, and attach the Origin to its middle with
the plastic base piece provided. Place 5 Willpower in each of its 5 spheres.
Each player chooses a side (Bliss or Gloom), and one Spirit belonging to the chosen side.
Each side will control two Spirits. Players of the same side will play as teammates.
After the Spirits are chosen, place their matching Spirit boards in front of their controlling
players. Place each chosen Spirit’s die-cut tile into a plastic standee matching the color of its
affiliation, and place it in front of their controlling players for now.
Set up each player’s Emotion Deck. For your first few games, we suggest using the Starter
Decks for each Spirit (the decklists can be found in the Appendix), but experienced players may
build their own deck before playing. A deck in Cerebria consists of 14 Mild Emotions. Shuffle
and place these decks on their respective slots on the Main Board in front of the players.
Important: One player of each side should play with a deck of Emotions marked with a white
dot/moon symbol in the lower left corner. This helps in identifying the owner of an Emotion while
it is on the board, which will be relevant in certain situations.
Separate each side’s Strong Emotions to two decks (one with the dot/moon symbol and one
without) containing 1 copy of each Strong Emotion. Each player takes 1 of these decks of their
respective side and symbol, and places it within easy reach.
Separate the Monument Fragments, and the Spirit Upgrade, “+1 Intensity” and Meditation
tokens based on their affiliation. Place them within easy reach of the players of the respective
side.
Take each side’s matching Realm Action tiles, and lay them out between the Spirit Boards.
Take each side’s matching Fortitude Dial, set it to 8, and and place it between the two Spirit
Boards.
Shuffle the 7 Bliss, Gloom, and Common Aspiration cards and form three face-down decks.
Place the Common deck above the Main Board, and give the Bliss and Gloom decks to the
respective teams. Turn one of the Common Aspiration cards face up - this will be the first
Common Aspiration. Finally, both sides draw the topmost card of their own Aspiration deck,
and place it face down in front of them (they may look at it at any time). If the drawn card is the
same as the Common Aspiration, shuffle it back to the deck and draw a new one. These cards

will be the Secret Aspirations of each team, and should be kept hidden from the other team at
all times.
From the remaining Aspiration cards, set aside a random Common Aspiration card, and one
random face down Aspiration Card from each team. If any of these cards is the same as the
Common one set aside, draw a new one. These will be the Endgame Aspirations, scored at
the end of the game in one last Revelation. Players may look at their own Endgame Aspiration
and the Common Aspiration at any time.
Give each player their starting resources: 4 Willpower and 2 Essence. Each player also draws
a starting hand of 3 Emotion cards.
Randomly determine which side will begin the game. Players on the opposing side each gain
1 Willpower as compensation.
Starting with a player on the non-starter side and alternating between the two sides, each player
places their Spirit on a Spirit slot next to the Origin (the inner circle), then places a
Brightness/Bleakness Emotion card (based on their affiliation) on one of the Realm slots of
the Frontier adjacent to their Spirit. Place an Essence from the general reserve on the leftmost
slot of the placed Brightness and Bleakness cards. Set any remaining Brightness and
Bleakness cards aside (they are never included in any player’s deck).
As a result of the placed starter Emotions, Frontier and Realm controls will change. If a side
gained control of a Realm this way, flip that Realm’s Action tile to its Controlled side. Each side
will also seize the control of 2 Frontiers with their starting Emotions - place a Frontier Control
token on the slot above those Frontiers with the controller’s side face up.

The game can now begin.

Flow of Play
Round and player turn order
A game of Cerebria is played for a maximum of 5 rounds. Each round consists of a number of
player turns, alternating between the Bliss and Gloom sides, until both sides have exhausted all
their Fortitude for the round. At this point, there is a short wrap-up phase, then a new round
begins.
The starting side is determined randomly before the first round, while each subsequent round is
started by the side that has scored less Identity Fragments (See “Revelation and Fragment
Scoring”). In case of a tie, the side with less scored Major Fragments begins the round. If there’s
still a tie, the side that exhausted their Fortitude first in the previous round goes first in the
current one.
At the beginning of each side’s first player turn of each round, allied players may decide which
of them will act first. During their subsequent player turns, play order will alternate between
them. This sets a player order for the round that players will follow until both sides have
exhausted their Fortitude.

Example: Leo and Diana are playing Bliss, while Steve and Fred are playing Gloom. It is the
beginning of Round 4. Gloom has scored 2 Major and 1 Minor Fragments, while Bliss has only
scored 2 Major Fragments, so the Bliss side will go first.The Bliss players agree that Leo should
be the first to act. After he finished taking his actions, it is now Gloom’s turn. Despite of Steve
having acted last in the previous round, the Gloom players agree that he should act first this
round. After his player turn is finished, it is Diana’s turn, then finally Fred’s. The round continues
in a Leo-Steve-Diana-Fred player order.

Round Structure
A round consists of two phases: Player Turns and Wrap Up.
1. Player turns: Bliss and Gloom players alternate taking 1, 2 or 3 Spirit Actions, until they
have used up all Fortitude for the round. Spirit Actions are detailed in the subsequent
chapter.

2. Wrap up
a. Advance the Fortitude Dials: Set the Round Counter dial (the smaller one) to
the next round’s number, then set the Fortitude Dial to the starting value printed
below the round number (1 more than in the previous round).
b. Draw Emotions: Each player draws 1 Emotion card.
c. Remove Meditation Markers: Remove the marker tokens from all Meditation
Actions to indicate they can be used again next round.

Game End
The game may end in two ways:
●
●

At the end of the fifth round
If either Bliss of Gloom has scored all 3 of their Major Fragments, at which point the
game ends immediately.

Spirit Actions
During their player turn, each player must take 1, 2 or 3 Spirit Action.

There are 9 different Spirit Actions available. Each requires spending one Fortitude and some
amount of Willpower. Spirit Actions fall into two categories: Main Board Actions (5) and Spirit
Board Actions (4).
Important: as an Action, players may always spend 1 Fortitude to gain 1 Willpower during their
turn. This ensures that the players are never left without anything to do.

Main Board Actions
There are five Main Board Actions, each associated with one of the five realms of Cerebria.
These actions are printed on 5 double-sided tiles in front of each side, each showing their
current Willpower cost. This is important because the Willpower cost of these actions is 1 less
as long as the acting player’s side controls the Realm associated with the Action (See “Influence
and Control”).
Gain Willpower (costs 1 Willpower): Gain 3 Willpower from the general
reserve (not from adjacent Origin spheres). Costs 0 Willpower as long as
you control the Valley of Motives.

Draw Emotion (costs 1 Willpower): Draw the top two cards of your
Emotion deck. Add one of those cards to your hand, and discard the
other. Costs 0 Willpower as long as you control the Cradle of
Senses.

Move Emotion (costs 2 Willpower): Move a friendly Emotion card from
anywhere on the main board to an empty Emotion slot adjacent to your
Spirit. This may cause Realm and Frontier controls to change. Costs 1
Willpower as long as you control the Network of Thoughts.

Intensify Emotion (costs 1 Willpower): Place 1 Essence from your
reserve on the rightmost empty Essence slot of an adjacent friendly
Emotion. This typically increases the Emotion’s Intensity, and as a
result, Realm and Frontier controls may change. Costs 0 Willpower if
you control the Land of Desires.

Important: Strong Emotions: If the placed Essence
reaches the Empower threshold icon printed on the
Essence track on a Mild emotion, that Emotion can now be
Empowered to its Strong counterpart (See “Spirit Board
Actions”)

Harvest Essence (costs any amount Willpower you choose to
spend): Gain 1 less Essence than the amount of Willpower you spent.
Gain Essence equal to the Willpower spent if you control the Willow of
Values.

Spirit Board Actions
There are four Spirit Board actions: Move Spirit, Invoke Emotion, Quell Emotion and Meditation.
Unlike the Main Board actions, Realm control has no effect on their Willpower cost, but they can
be upgraded by discarding Emotions to make them more effective. Each Spirit Board Action
has four potential Upgrades.

Upgrading Spirit Boards Actions
Immediately before taking any Spirit Board action, you may discard one or two Emotion card(s)
from your hand, then place a Spirit Upgrade token on one of the upgrade slots of that action.

Some Upgrades require two Emotion cards to be discarded at the same time - the number of
required cards is printed on the Upgrade slot. You can only place one token per Action used.

The Vibe on the Spirit Upgrade token placed must match the Vibe of at least one of the
discarded cards, and all Upgrade slots of the same action must be covered with different
Vibes. Before placing a Spirit Upgrade token on an Action, you may choose to permanently
remove another token already on that Action - this can be useful if you really want an upgrade,
but don’t have the right colored card for it.
Important: The upgrade always takes place before taking the respective Action (and only
then), so it affects the Action right away.

Move Spirit (costs 1 Willpower)
Move your Spirit to an adjacent Spirit slot on the main board. By default, you cannot end your
Move action on the same slot as another opposing Spirit (you can end it on the same slot as
your teammate’s Spirit).

Upgrades
Haste (1 card): You may move 1 slot further.

Surmount (1 card): You may now end your Move action on the
same slot as another opposing Spirit.
Determination (1 card): When you use this Action for the first time
each round, place 1 of the spent Willpower on this Upgrade. At the
end of the round, add this Willpower to your reserve.
Blazing Speed (1 card): You may move 1 slot further. Cumulative
with Haste.

Invoke Emotion (costs 2 Willpower)
Place an Emotion card from your hand on an empty Emotion slot adjacent to your Spirit. Then,
immediately place 1 Essence on each of the red Essence slots on the card. If you do not have
enough Essence to do this, you cannot Invoke the Emotion. That Emotion has now entered the
main board, with an intensity value associated with the rightmost non-empty Essence slot. As a
result, Realm and Frontier controls may change.

Upgrades
Bolster (1 card): You may choose to spend 2 additional Willpower
when taking an Invoke Action. If you do, you may immediately place 1
additional Essence on the Invoked Emotion from your reserve (on top
of the necessary starting Essence).
Inner Force (1 card): You may choose to spend 1 additional Willpower
when taking an Invoke Action. If you do, you may place up to 1 of the
required Essence on the Invoked Emotion from the general reserve
instead of your own.
Determination (1 card): When you use this Action for the first time
each round, place 1 of the spent Willpower on this Upgrade. At the end
of the round, add this Willpower to your reserve.
Empower (1 card): Instead of Invoking on an empty slot, you may
replace an adjacent Mild Emotion with its Strong counterpart from your
deck of Strong Emotions. If you do so, discard the Mild Emotion and
move all Essence from it onto the new Strong Emotion. If the Mild Emotion doesn’t have enough
Essence on it to cover all the Strong Emotion’s red slots, you may not Empower it. After this
Action, immediately return 2 of the spent Willpower to your reserve. Cannot be used with Bolster
or Inner Force.
Important: Strong Emotions can only enter the Main Board with the Empower action - they
cannot be drawn, nor Invoked on empty slots.
Example: Leo plays as Anxiety, and is adjacent to an Anger card with 2 Essence on it. It is the
fourth round, and he already has the Empower upgrade for his Invoke Action. He spends 2
Willpower, discards Anger, replaces it with Rage, and places the two Essence from Anger on it.
Since Rage’s base intensity is 2, Realm and Frontier controls don’t change, but Rage’s “enters
the board” ability triggers. Leo also immediately regains his 2 spent Willpower (as the Empower
action’s bonus). Note that since Rage has two red slots, Leo wouldn’t be able to do this if Anger
only had 1 Essence on it.

Quell Emotion (costs 2 Willpower)
Remove the rightmost Essence from an adjacent hostile Emotion with a Vibe matching the Vibe
token of one of the Quelled Vibe upgrades of this Action. If the last Essence is removed from a
an Emotion this way, remove it from the board and place it in the Discard pile if it was a Mild
Emotion, or back into the Strong Emotion deck if it was a Strong Emotion. Then, its owner may
draw a new Emotion card.
Important: This Action can only be used once you have at least one
“Quelled Vibe” upgrade.

Upgrades
Quelled Vibe (1 card): You may now Quell hostile Emotions with a
Vibe matching the one on this Upgrade slot
Quelled Vibe (1 card): You may now Quell hostile Emotions with a
Vibe matching the one on this Upgrade slot
Determination (1 card): When you use this Action for the first time
each round, place 1 of the spent Willpower on this Upgrade. At the end
of the round, add this Willpower to your reserve.
Snuff Out (1 card): You may choose to spend 1 additional Willpower
when taking the Quell action. If you do, you may remove 1 additional
Essence from the Quelled Emotion.

Important: Quelling Bleakness and Brightness Emotions:
● The starting Emotions, Brightness and Bleakness, can be Quelled with any Quelled Vibe
upgrade, regardless of its Vibe.
● If the last Essence is removed from a Bleakness or Brightness Emotion, remove it from
the game instead of placing it into a Discard pile. Its owner may not draw a new Emotion
card.

Meditation (costs 0 Willpower)
Meditation is a unique action in two ways: it always costs 0 Willpower, and it can only be taken
once each round. It is the primary way for the Spirits to gain Willpower and other resources, and
it can also lead to a Revelation, when the important Identity Fragments are scored.
When taking the Meditation action, execute the following in this order:

1. Cover the Meditation Action’s spot with a Meditation marker to indicate that it cannot
be used again this round
2. Choose 1 adjacent Origin sphere, and take Willpower from it (up to the amount of
Willpower currently in the sphere):
a. 1 Willpower by default,
b. 1 additional Willpower for each controlled Frontier adjacent to the acting Spirit
(See “Adjacency” and “Control”)
c. 1 additional Willpower if the “Origin’s Favored” upgrade is active
3. If an Origin sphere was emptied this way, resolve a Revelation (as detailed in the
subsequent chapter)
4. Receive a bonus based on the Origin sphere the Willpower was taken from. Receive
the bonus one additional time if at least one friendly Major Fragment is facing this sphere
(see “Revelation and Fragment Scoring”):
a. 2 additional Willpower from the general reserve
b. 1 Essence
c. 1 Spirit upgrade token (of any Vibe, placed immediately on a 1-card Upgrade)
d. 1 Fortitude (essentially making this Meditation Action cost no Fortitude, but it still
counts towards the maximum number of actions you can take in one turn)
e. Draw 1 Emotion card
5. Rotate the Origin clockwise once, changing the alignment of the Origin spheres

Upgrades (from left to right)
Origin’s Favored (2 cards): When taking Willpower from a sphere, take an additional
Willpower from that sphere.
Unwavering (2 cards): When taking Willpower from a sphere, take 2 additional Willpower from
the general reserve.
Origin’s Bounty (1 card): When receiving the Origin sphere’s bonus, you may choose to
receive any other Origin sphere’s bonus instead.
Shaper’s Boon (1 card): Before taking Willpower from a sphere, you may rotate the Origin
clockwise once.
Example: As her second Action during her turn, Diana chooses to take her Meditation Action.
She covers its slot with a Meditation marker to indicate this. Her Spirit, Harmony, is on the

Motives Realm, and Bliss controls one of the two Frontiers her Spirit is adjacent to (the one
between Motives and Values). Standing on a Realm, Diana’s Spirit is only adjacent to 1 Origin
sphere (the one with the Spirit Upgrade bonus), so she takes a total of 2 Willpower from it. She
also receives 2 additional Willpower from the general reserve, since she her Spirit has the
Unwavering upgrade.
This empties the sphere and triggers a Revelation, which is resolved immediately. After the
Revelation, Diana takes the chosen sphere’s bonus, a free Spirit Upgrade token, and places it
on the Origin’s Bounty upgrade. Finally, she rotates the Origin clockwise - she is now adjacent
to a different Origin sphere.

Revelation and Fragment Scoring
Although the state of Cerebria is in constant flux due to the eternal struggle between Bliss and
Gloom, there are certain moments that have a permanent impact on its identity. These moments
are called Revelations, and they play a crucial role in the game’s flow. During each Revelation,
three Aspiration cards are evaluated, and based on the outcome, Bliss and/or Gloom can
contribute a Fragment to Cerebria’s forming Identity. At the end of the game, the Identity’s
composition will determine the winning side.
A Revelation is triggered immediately once an Origin sphere is emptied during a
Revelation. When this happens, take the following steps in this order:
1. Check the face up Common Aspiration card, and determine if it’s accomplished by Bliss,
Gloom, or neither side (in case of a tie). Then, set it aside and draw a new face up
Common Aspiration card at random. If there is only one card left in the deck, shuffle
back the previously completed Common Aspiration cards before drawing a new one.
2. Each side checks their secret Aspiration card.
a. If they accomplished it, they announce it and set it aside face up, then draw
another secret Aspiration card at random. If it is the same as the Common
Aspiration card, shuffle it back into the deck and draw a new one until a different
card is drawn. If there is only one card left in the deck, shuffle back the team’s
previously completed Aspiration cards before drawing a new one.
b. If they did not win it (the other side accomplished it, or it is tied), they set it aside
face up, then they may choose a new secret Aspiration card from the remaining
deck. It must be different from the Common Aspiration card. If there is only one
card left in the deck, shuffle back the team’s previously completed Aspiration
cards before choosing a new one.
3. Based on the number completed Aspirations (Common or secret), each side may score
a Fragment. Add the scored Fragment(s) to the Identity in the middle of the Origin, on
top of each other.

a. If a side accomplished 2 Aspirations and the other accomplished 0, the winning
side scores a Major Fragment of their color. Align it so that the Bliss/Gloom
symbol on it faces the sphere just emptied. From now on, that sphere will
grant its bonus to the Major Fragment’s team an additional time during
their Meditation Action.
b. If a side accomplished 2 Aspirations and the other accomplished 1, the winning
side scores a Minor Fragment of their color.
c. If a side accomplished 1 Aspiration and the other accomplished 0, the winning
side scores a Minor Fragment of their color.
d. If both sides accomplished 1 Aspiration, each scores a Minor Fragment of their
color.
e. In the unlikely case neither side wins any Aspiration, no Fragment is scored.
4. Finally, place 5 Willpower from the general supply into the Sphere just emptied, plus 1
additional Willpower for each Major Fragment facing that Sphere.

The Aspiration Cards
There are seven different Aspiration cards in Cerebria, and each can be accomplished through
different aspects of dominance over Cerebria. Any of these Aspirations can appear as either
common or secret, but no team’s secret Aspiration can be the same as the common one.

1. Aspiration of Awareness: accomplished by the team
controlling more Realms than the other.

2. Aspiration of Allegiance: accomplished by the team
controlling more Frontiers than the other.

3. Aspiration of Versatility: accomplished by the team having Emotions on more
Frontiers (their Intensity does not matter)

4. Aspiration of Unity: accomplished by the team having
a longer uninterrupted chain of adjacent friendly
Emotions.

5. Aspiration of Wisdom: accomplished by the team
having more Spirit Upgrade tokens on their boards combined

6. Aspiration of Dominance: accomplished by the team
with more Essence (not Intensity!) on their Emotions on
the main board.

7. Aspiration of Diversity: accomplished by the team with
more different Vibes on their Emotions on the main board.
Brightness and Bleakness (the starting Emotions) do not count
towards this Aspiration.

Ending the Game
The game ends with a side’s immediate victory as soon as they score their third Major
Fragment. Otherwise, the game ends after the fifth round.

After the fifth round, reveal all three Endgame Aspiration cards that were set aside during game
setup, and resolve a Revelation, following the normal rules. The only exception is that if one
team would score any kind of Fragment during this Revelation (minor or major), they score their
own Top Piece Fragment instead. Place it on the top of the Identity. If this Revelation would
normally result in placing both a Bliss and a Gloom Minor fragment, or placing no Fragment at
all, no Top Piece is placed.
After the final Revelation, Fragments and other achievements in the game are converted to
points to determine the winner:
●
●
●
●
●
●

Each Minor Fragment is worth 2 points
Each Major Fragment is worth 3 points
The Top Piece is worth 4 points
Each fully upgraded Spirit Action is worth 1 point
Each Strong Emotion is worth 1 point
Each Emotion with an Essence on all of its Essence slots is worth 1 point.

The team with more points wins the game. If the points are tied, Cerebria is in complete
balance, and the game ends in a tie.

Appendix
Game Variant - The Shaper
Playing as the Shaper, a single player may control one Spirit powerful enough to represent Pliss
or Gloom on its own. The Shaper variant can be

Changes in Setup
●
●
●
●
●
●

The Shaper chooses a side (Bliss or Gloom), and one Spirit belonging to the chosen
side. Place that Spirit’s board in front of the player.
The Shaper will have one Emotion deck with 14 Mild Emotions
The Shaper receives moire starting resources: 7 Willpower and 5 Essence. Each
player also draws a starting hand of 3 Emotion cards.
The side opposing the Shaper will begin the game.
Proceed with the game setup as described in the core rules.
When placing the Brightness/Bleakness starting Emotions, place the Emotion cards first,
then the Shaper places their Spirit on a slot adjacent to the Origin and one for their nowcontrolled Frontiers.

Changes in Gameplay
The game is played very similarly to the core game, with the following important exceptions:
●
●
●

Fortitude: The Shaper has 1 additional Fortitude each round. The available Fortitude
in the five rounds of the game is 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13, respectively.
Wrap up phase - Draw Emotions: The Shaper draws 2 additional Emotion cards
instead of 1.
Meditation: The Shaper may use its Meditation action twice per round, but it cannot use
it twice during the same turn.

Spirit Abilities
Harmony - Serene Enlightenment: When placing a Spirit Upgrade, you
may place a Vibe token of any color, regardless of the discarded
Emotion’s Vibe.

Empathy - You Can Count On Me: Once per
round, if a Bliss Emotion would be Quelled on a Frontier adjacent to
Empathy, you may pay 1 Essence from your reserve to prevent it.

Anxiety - Foreboding Presence: You may Invoke “Bleakness”
Emotions that were set aside during setup (you don’t need to have
them in your hand).

Malice - Soul Leech: You may pay 1 additional Willpower when
you use the Quell action. If you do, gain 1 Essence.

Starting Emotion Decklists
Harmony

Empathy

Anxiety

Malice

2 x Optimism

2 x Optimism

2 x Fear

2 x Fear

2 x Longing

2 x Longing

2 x Suspicion

2 x Suspicion

2 x Sociability

2 x Sociability

2 x Anger

2 x Anger

2 x Excitement

2 x Excitement

2 x Bitterness

2 x Bitterness

2 x Courage

2 x Courage

2 x Jealousy

2 x Jealousy

2 x Cheerfulness

2 x Cheerfulness

2 x Boredom

2 x Boredom

2 x Self-Esteem

2 x Generosity

2 x Insecurity

2 x Selfishness

