AGE 8+

Let’s Battle!
Everyone draws three cards, and the youngest player goes first.
Here’s what to do on your turn:
1.	 Draw a card from your deck.
2.	Play a card from your hand by putting it onto the table in
front of you. Sometimes you can play more than one card
in a turn, but you have to play at least one.

How to Play
Dungeon Mayhem™ is a free-for-all battle for two to
four players. Be the last player left standing and you win!
Play as one of four different characters. Each character’s
tricks, gear, and skills are represented by a deck of cards.

Contents
• 4 hit point trackers	 • 4 reference cards
• 4 hit point tokens	
• 16 damage tokens
• Four 28-card decks
Sutha
the Skullcrusher

Azzan
the Mystic

Lia
the Radiant

Oriax
the Clever

Check your reference card to decide which card you
want to play. You can see what all the different cards do
on the back of this sheet.

3.	Put all the cards you played this turn into your discard pile
unless they have the
symbol on them. Cards with the
symbol stay on the table in front of you until they are
destroyed—then they also go to the discard pile.
4.	 Pass the turn to the player on your left.

Did you play all your cards?
Barbarian

Wizard

Paladin

Rogue

The First Time You Play
Pop the cardboard tokens out of the frame, then open both
packs of cards and separate them by color.

If you don’t have any cards left in your hand, congrats!
Draw two more cards.

Did you run out of cards in
your deck?
No problem! Just shuffle your discard
pile and start your deck over again.

Get Ready

Hit Points

1.	 Choose one of the four character decks.

Each player starts the game with 10 hit points. Whenever you
play a card that deals damage to another player, they lose
hit points (unless they have a card with a
symbol). When
you take damage, move the token on your hit point tracker
to show how many hit points you have left. If your hit points
drop down to zero (the
symbol), you’re knocked out.

2.	 Take the hit point tracker, hit point token, and reference
	 card that match your deck, and set them on the table
	 in front of you.
3.	 Put a token on the number

on your hit point counter.

4.	 Shuffle the rest of your deck and put it on the table
	 face down. Your play area should look something
	 like this:

Winning the Game
Use your cards to deal damage to your opponents, and try not
to take any damage yourself. The game ends when only one
player is still in the game. That player is the winner!
Sometimes a card can knock out many players at the same
time. If no players are left in the game, then it’s a tie—so get
ready to battle again!

Card Types

Draw
Playing Draw cards lets you draw extra cards. When
you play a Draw card, put one card into your hand for
each
symbol on that card.

Attack
Attack cards do damage to your opponents, and
each character has their own unique attacks.

Healing

When you play an Attack card, choose one player (or Defense
card) as the target of that attack. That player loses one hit point
for each
symbol on the card (unless they have a Defense
card in play—see examples below).

Play Again

Defense
Defense cards protect you by taking damage
for you. Here’s everything you need to know
about them:
F	 The number of symbols on a Defense card is the 		
	 amount of damage that card can take.
F	 When you play a Defense card, place it face up on the table 	
	 in front of you. It stays there until it is destroyed.
F	 Put a damage token on one of the symbols for each 		
	 point of damage it takes. When there are no symbols
	 left, that card is destroyed and goes into the discard pile.
F	 You can have more than one Defense card protecting you,
	 and Attack cards can’t deal any damage to you until all your
	 Defense cards are destroyed.
F	
	
	
	
	

Healing cards let you recover from damage. When
you play a Healing card, you get one hit point back
for each
symbol on that card.

If an attack card deals more than enough damage to 	
destroy one of your Defense cards, any extra damage
goes through to your other Defense cards. Once your
last Defense card is destroyed, any extra damage goes
through to you.

Play Again cards let you play more cards on your
turn. When you play a Play Again card, you can play
one extra card for each symbol on the card.
Remember, the extra cards you play for each symbol can
also be Play Again cards!
Your turn won’t end until you have played a card for each
symbol on the cards you have used that turn. If you play all the
cards in your hand before finishing your Play Again action,
draw two more cards from your deck and keep going until
you finish.

Combinations
Some cards have more than one kind of symbol on them.
When you play one of those cards, you get to use all the
different symbols!

Mighty Powers
Each character has some special abilities that are unique
to that character. When you play one of these cards, just do
whatever the card says!

Frequently Asked Questions

EXAMPLE 1

Q: Can I use healing cards to get more than 10 hit points?
A: No. Ten is the most you can have.
DISCARD PILE

This Attack card deals two
damage, which is just enough
to destroy this Defense card.
The Defense card goes to the
discard pile.

Q: If I play a card with a symbol on it, do I have to play another
card even if I don’t want to?
A: Yes. You always have to play one card for each symbol on the
cards you have already played.
Q: If I use Azzan’s mighty power to take a Defense card from
another player, what happens if that player gets knocked out?
A: You keep that defense card in play until it is destroyed, then give
it back to the knocked-out player.
Q: If I use Oriax’s mighty power to steal and play a card from
another player’s deck, whose discard pile does that
card go into?
A: The stolen card goes into the discard pile of the
player you stole it from.

EXAMPLE 2
DAMAGE TO
TARGET PLAYER

Questions?
Contact us: Support.Wizards.com

DISCARD PILE

This Attack card deals three
damage, but this Defense card
only has one symbol left.
The Defense card is destroyed,
and the target player loses two
hit points.

Credits
Lead Design: Jordan Comar, Roscoe Wetlaufer
Additional Design: Mike Mearls, C.J. Prosise
Editing: Gregg Luben
Copy Editing: Katy Bowman
Illustration: Kyle Ferrin
Graphic Design: Trish Yochum
Art Direction: Emi Tanji
Creative Direction: Shauna Narciso

Production Management: Cynda Callaway,
Gretchen Tapp, Tom Wänerstrand
Producer: Dan Tovar
Packaging Design: Roni Ruggenberg
Prepress Management: Jefferson Dunlap
Brand Direction: Nathan Stewart
Brand Management: Shelly Mazzanoble
Playtest Coordination: C.J. Prosise, Dawson Hadaway

©2018 Wizards. All trademarks, including the dragon ampersand, are property of Wizards of the Coast
LLC. Manufactured by: Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH. Represented by: Hasbro
Europe, 4 The Square, Stockley Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1ET, UK. Please retain package for future
reference. 400C6164000001 EN

