A Game by Reiner Knizia
For 3 to 6 Players Aged 8 and Up

GMT
GAMES

Overview
The objective of the game is to maneuver your two-car team to the Constructors’
Championship, by scoring the most points during a predetermined number
of races.
The cars change position in relationship to each other (no track is necessary).
Cars are maneuvered by playing cards. Each card directly affects one or two
cars—though not necessarily yours—either by moving them forward or backward in position.

Components
12	Plastic cars (two each in six colors)
6	 Team pit crew cards (one in each of the six colors)
54	Action cards
1	 12-sided die
1	 Rulebook
1	 Folding Racetrack Section

How to Win
Before beginning the first race, the players should decide how many races they
wish to run for their season. Three races can be completed in about an hour
and is a good starting point.
Points are awarded at the end of each race to the cars in first through sixth
positions as follows:
First	 10 points
Second	 6 points
Third	 4 points
Fourth	 3 points
Fifth	
2 points
Sixth	 1 point
A player scores points for all of his cars in the top six positions. Uncontrolled
teams also score points (and can win the game). Update the overall championship standings by adding the points earned in the current race to the total points
earned previously for each player (or uncontrolled team).



Formula Motor Racing

At the end of the last race of the season, the team with the most total points is
the winner. If tied, then the winner is the team tied for most total points which
controlled the higher-placing car in the final race.

How to Set up
1. Each player selects a team of two cars of the same color and is assigned the
pit crew card of the corresponding color. If there are only three players, each
player selects two teams. The cars are used to keep track of car positions during the race. All twelve cars are used in every race regardless of the number
of players involved. With four or five players the remaining colors represent
uncontrolled teams participating in the race.
2. One player takes all of the team pit crew cards into his hand and draws them
randomly. The cars of the first color he draws start in first and twelfth place; the
cars of the second color start in second and eleventh place; and so on. The cars of
the last color drawn start in sixth and seventh place. (An optional folding track
section is provided for placing cars.) Then, place the team pit crew cards in front
of their players to remind everyone which color(s) represent which players.
3. One player shuffles the action cards and deals five cards to each player. Place
the remainder face down as a Draw Pile.

How to Play
The player whose car is in the pole position (first place) takes the first turn of the
game. When his turn is complete, play proceeds clockwise around the table.
Each player in his turn must play one action card face up onto a Discard Pile next
to the Draw Pile. The player who plays the action card is the one who chooses
which car it effects (within the limits of the card chosen). After resolving the
effects of the action card, the player draws one action card from the Draw Pile
for his hand. A player must play an action card and draw an action card during
his turn even if all of his cars are out of the race.
Play continues until the last action card is drawn. Each player then gets one
more turn to play an action card (without drawing a replacement card). Thus,
the race ends when each player has four action cards remaining in his hand.
Copyright © 2007 GMT Games, LLC



Effects of the Action Cards
Most action cards affect the position of cars in the race; some remove cars completely! Because of the constant movement (and removal) of the cars during a
race, gaps will appear in the line. These gaps should be closed to keep the line
looking neat and tidy. Cars that are out of the race are set aside in a separate line,
with the first cars knocked out placed at the end of the line, while cars removed
later are added to the front of the line. At the end of the race, the removed cars
finish in this order, coming after all the cars that are still running.
Here are the procedures to follow with each card [the number in parentheses
shows the number of each card type included in the deck]:
Overtake +2 [6], Overtake +3 [12], Overtake +4 [6]. Choose one car of the appropriate color and the car directly behind it (in
its slipstream), and move them forward the number
of places indicated. Therefore, unless you are moving the last place car, two cars will always move
when you play an Overtake card. If the chosen car
reaches first place, ignore any additional places it would have gained. You
may select the car in first place when you play an Overtake card, in which
case no movement would take place. If both cars of the indicated color are
out of the race, the card has no effect.
Wrong Line –1 [3], Off Circuit –2 [3], Lose Control –3 [3]. Choose any car and
move it back the number of places shown.

Tailender Turbo [4]. Choose one of the last three cars still in the
race, and move it forward three places. The car behind it does not
move forward with it.



Formula Motor Racing

Pit Stop [8]. Choose one car of the indicated color and roll the die:
Roll:	
1-6	
7-12	

Effect:
The chosen car moves back the number of places equal
to the die roll. If the car reaches last place, ignore any
additional places it would have lost.
The chosen car does not pit and remains in its current position.

If both cars of the indicated color are out of the race, the card has no effect.
If the card is a beige Pit Stop card, the player can choose any car.
Charge (Lose Gears) [3] and Charge (Engine Blows) [3]. Choose any
car and roll the die:
Roll:	
1-9	
10-12	

Effect:
The chosen car (alone) moves forward one place.
If the card is Charge (Lose Gears), the chosen car moves
to last place.
If the card is Charge (Engine Blows), the chosen car has
blown its engine and is out of the race! Set it aside.

If the player chose a car of his own team, he may continue to roll the die and
move forward the same car again. He can stop at any time after rolling at
least once. He must stop when rolling a 10-12. If the player selects the car
of a different team, he may only roll the die once.
Spin Out [1] or Spin Last [1]. The player rolls the die to determine
which car is affected. The number is the place of the car which is
affected by the spin. If the player does not like the result of the first
die roll, he may re-roll the die once. If the player chooses to re-roll,
the result of the re-roll must be accepted and determines the car
which has spun. He may not switch to the result of the original
roll if he dislikes the re-roll.
The spun car is out of the race, if Spin Out was played, or is placed
in last place, if Spin Last was played. It is possible for the player to knock
out one of his own cars when playing this card. If the position rolled is not
in the race due to other cars previously having been knocked out of the race,
then the card has no effect.

Copyright © 2007 GMT Games, LLC



Crash [1]. The player rolls the die to determine which car is affected. The number is the place of the car which has crashed. This car is out of the race. In
addition, the car immediately in front of or behind the car which crashed is
also knocked out of the race by the crash. The player who played the
card selects which other car is involved (unless the first or last place
crashed, in which case the player must choose the car behind or in
front of the crashed car, respectively). Both cars involved in the crash
are placed in the front of the line of removed cars, finishing the race in
the same relative position to each other that they were prior to the crash.
It is possible for the player to knock out one or two (!) of his own cars when
playing this card. If the position rolled is not in the race due to other cars
previously having been knocked out of the race, the card has no effect.

End of the Race
When the race ends, the points are awarded for first through sixth place as
explained above. Uncontrolled teams also score.
If it is not the last race of the season, leave the cars in the order they finished.
Behind the last finishing car add the separate line of cars that had been knocked
out during the race, with the first removed car thus finishing in twelfth place.
This is how the cars will start the next race.
One player collects all the action cards, shuffles them, and deals five new action cards to each player. The players do not retain any action cards from the
previous race in their hands. The next race is ready to begin, with the player
controlling the first place car making the first play.

play options
Shorter Races. For those players who want each race to be shorter so that
more races can be completed in a session, we offer the following suggestion.
Randomly discard six cards face down from the shuffled deck before each race
begins. Players can agree in advance to vary the length of specific races from
others to simulate a season of races at different tracks.
Drivers’ Championship. If you want to play for the Drivers’ Championship



Formula Motor Racing

as well, mark your team cars with different numbers (and driver names), and
record their points individually on the scoresheet. The car (driver) with the most
total points at the end of the season wins the Drivers’ Championship. Ties are
broken by highest position in the last race.
Complete Season. The Formula One season is 17 races. For those diehard fans
who wish to run a complete season over multiple playing sessions, record the
position of all the cars at the end of a session. This is then used as the starting
point for the next session.

Credits

Design: Reiner Knizia
Project Coordination: Andy Lewis
Art Director: Rodger B. MacGowan
Cover and Card Illustrations: Rodger B. MacGowan
Card Design: Mark Simonitch
Packaging Design: Rodger B. MacGowan
Rulebook Formatting: Mark Simonitch
Production Coordination: Tony Curtis

Card summary
GMT Games
P.O. Box 1308
Hanford, CA 93232-1308
www.gmtgames.com
(800) 523-6111
© 2007 GMT Games

Copyright © 2007 GMT Games, LLC

ADVANCES 		
	
Overtake	
24
	
Charge	
6
	Tailender Turbo	
4

34

Trouble		
	
Wrong Line	
3
	
Off Circuit	
3
	
Lose Control	
3
	
Pit Stop	
8
	
Spin	
2
	
Crash	
1

20



You may photocopy this form for personal use.



Formula Motor Racing

Points:

Points:

Team:

Cumulative Totals
(Opt) Cars:

Race #

Team:

Cumulative Totals
(Opt) Cars:

Race #

Team:

Cumulative Totals
(Opt) Cars:

Points:

___	 ___	

(Opt) Car #	

Race #

Blue		

Team Color	
___	 ___	

Green	
___	 ___	

Yellow	

Scoresheet
___	 ___	

Orange 	
___	 ___	

Red		

___	 ___

Purple

