Glory III

A GMT GLORY Series Game

Antietam; Maryland, September 17, 1862
and Cedar Creek; Virginia, October 19, 1864

RULEBOOK
A RICHARD H. BERG Game Design
Table of Contents
1.	
2.	
3.	
4.	
5.	
6.	
7.	

Introduction.................................................	2
Components.................................................	2
Sequence of Play.........................................	3
Activation....................................................	4
Leadership...................................................	5
Movement...................................................	5
Facing..........................................................	6

8.	 Combat........................................................	7
9.	 Artillery Fire................................................	7
10.	 Charge.........................................................	8
11.	 Combat Results...........................................	11
12.	 Cavalry........................................................	13
13.	 Night............................................................	13
14.	 Refitting Glory I..........................................	14

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg





Glory III

1. INTRODUCTION

Dismounted Cavalry Unit

This is the 3rd, and revised, edition of the rules for the Glory game
system, a system that emphasizes accessibility and playability.
Given a choice between those two and strict historicity/reality,
we have tended to go with the former.

Dismounted Cohesion

2. COMPONENTS
The component list for each game in the series appears in the
Battle Book. The following is applicable to all such components.

2.1 The Map

The game maps cover the area over which the battles were fought.
The map is overlaid with a grid of hexagons—hexes—that are
used to regulate movement. The various types of terrain represented are discussed in the rules, below.

2.2 The Counters

Glory III contains three different types of Combat units: the
large, 9/16” (5/8” in the original Glory and Glory II: Across
the Rappahannock) counters are the infantry; the smaller, 1/2”
counters represent cavalry and artillery. They are all color-coded
for ease in identifying to which command (see 2.4) they belong.
All combat units are printed on both sides; the reverse shows the
unit in a “Disordered” state, except for cavalry, whose reverse
side can be its dismounted state depending on the battle.

Full Strength Artillery Unit
Command: Hays at
Fred; Tyler at C’ville

Appears in both
C’ville & Fred/burg

Activation Indicator:
Army Reserve

Movement Allowance
(Yellow = Horse Arty)

Fire Strength DRM

Disordered Indicator
No Fire Strength
Disordered Cohesion

Leader Unit

Division Commander

A p p e a r s only in
Chancellorsville
Movement Allowance

	 Cohesion

Disordered Indicator

	

	 	

Disordered Cohesion

	
	 	

	

	

	

Commander’s Name

Activation Die roll
Range

Chancellorsville only

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

The game uses a ten-sided die to resolve combat. A ‘0’ is a
“zero”, not a “ten”.
Activation Marker
Indicator: Stuart
Appears in both  
C’ville & Fred/burg

Charge Strength
Mounted Cohesion

Corps

2.3 The Die

Mounted Cavalry Unit
Fitz Lee’s Brigade,
	 	
	‘a’ battalion
	

Movement Allowance

The Activation Markers (4.1) indicate the Command to be activated and the battle they apply to. Some AMs have special uses,
discussed in 4.1, et seq., and the Battle rules.

Disordered Infantry Unit
	 	

Combined Activation
Rating

Division/Corp AM

Activation Marker
Indicator: I Corps

	 	

Command Range

Name
Appears only in
Chancellorsville
Rank

‘a’ unit in Kershaw’s
Brigade
Combat Strength

Range: Medium     Cohesion

Disordered Artillery Unit

Full Strength Infantry Unit

	

Dismounted Movement Allowance

Dismounted Combat Strength

Mounted Movement
Allowance

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg



Glory III

2.4 Definitions and Abbreviations

Awareness of the following terms will help as you read through
the rules:
AM = Abbreviation for Activation Marker, discussed in 4.1.
CCDR = Cohesion Check Die roll (or simply “cohesion check”),
a die roll made against a unit’s Cohesion rating to see whether
something happens; cf. Charge Results, Rallying, Defensive
Fire, etc. A CCDR is failed if after any applicable modifiers it
exceeds the unit’s Cohesion rating. A separate CCDR is made
for each affected unit.
Cohesion = A unit’s ability to withstand the rigors of combat.
Combat Strength = A unit’s ability to engage in combat, a
number based on how many men are present. See 10.23.
Combat Units = Artillery, cavalry and infantry counters. Leader
and marker counters are not Combat Units
Combined Activation (CA) = The ability to use more than one
command in an AM at the same time; see 4.25.
Command = A group of combat units controlled by one leader.
This also on occasion refers to all of the Leaders and Combat
Units that can be activated by a given AM.
DF = Defensive Fire.
DR = Die roll
DRM = Die roll Modifier, a numerical adjustment to the DR.
May = The word “may” means it’s up to the player, as opposed
to “must”, which invokes something mandatory.
Stack = When capitalized this refers to all of the Combat Units
located within a given hex. Thus, for game purposes, a “Stack”
could consist of a single Combat Unit not stacked with any others.
In such a case, that unit is considered the top unit in that “Stack”
and there is no bottom unit.
Withdrawn = What happens to a unit when it can no longer
withstand the rigors of combat.

3. SEQUENCE OF PLAY
Each game-turn follows a set sequence. However, the movement of individual units is somewhat random, dependent upon
when their Activation Markers are drawn.
Play Note: Some battles may add a segment to the basic Sequence; see the Scenario Rules in the Battle Book.

A. INITIATIVE DETERMINATION PHASE
1.	Roll the die to see who goes first. (5.2)
2.	Initiative Player chooses which Command (AM) will start
the turn, holding out one of that Command’s AMs for the
first Activation. (4.21)

B. MARKER SELECTION PHASE
Place all other Activation markers for commands that are either on the map or scheduled to enter that turn in The Pool.

C. ACTIVATION PHASE
1. Draw Activation Marker from Pool. (Exception: 3.A.2)
2. Activation Sequence:
	 a. Command Activation Sequence (4.24)
		
i. Combined Activation attempt (4.25)
	 	
ii. Artillery Fire (9.0)
	 	
iii. Units Move (except for firing artillery) (6.0)
	 	
iv. Infantry/Artillery Defensive Fire (10.3)
	 	
v. Infantry/Cavalry Charge (10.2)
	 	
vi. Rally (for Disordered units that did none
	 	
	
of the above) (11.5)
	 	
vii. Remove “Artillery Fired-No Move” and
	 	
	
“No Rally” markers.
	 	
		
		
		

Repeat the Command Activation Sequence “2.a”
(Steps i through vii) until the Command of each
Leader activated by the current AM has completed
its activation.

b. Remove “Artillery Return Fired” markers.	
	 c. Set aside the AM drawn for that Phase.

2.5 The Scale

Each infantry and cavalry unit contains around 200 men per
strength point, with dismounted cavalry units’ strength being
adjusted in many cases for weapon types and tactical capabilities.
Each artillery fire SP represents about 3–4 guns. Map scales are
given in the Battle Book.

Repeat the Activation Phase “C” until there are no markers
left in the Pool. When finished with all Activations go to the
Recovery Phase “D.”

Design Note: The artillery units included in the original Glory
represent 2–3 guns per SP. See 14.11 in regard to using these
artillery units when playing the original Glory scenarios with
this 3rd edition of the Glory series rules.

1.	All units in the Recovery Box may check for Return to the
game (11.6)
2.	All units in the Withdrawn Box are moved to the Recovery
Box.

D. RECOVERY PHASE

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg



Glory III

4. ACTIVATION

Play Note: A player may choose each turn to place any or all of
his available AMs into The Pool.

(4.11) Activation markers are used to determine which player
may “go”, and what units he may then use. Each Activation
Marker (AM) represents the superior Command level for a
particular unit, or group of units, as indicated on the 2nd line of
each counter.

(4.22) In the first segment of the Activation Phase after the Initiative Player has gone, one of the players (it doesn’t matter which
player) draws, randomly and blindly, one AM from The Pool.
That AM designates which command’s units are activated. Only
units from the drawn command may be activated.

Play Note: Some AMs activate the units of one Leader, some
AMs activate the units of all Leaders in a corps. Each scenario
has a set of specific rules.

(4.23) When an AM is drawn, the activated units of that Command may Move and engage in Combat. Disordered units of
that Command which neither move nor engage in combat may
attempt to Rally.

4.1 Activation Markers (AMs)

Example: The Antietam AM for Franklin/VI Corps would apply
to—and activate—all Union units whose Activation Indicator
is “VI”.
(4.12) All Commands have two AMs. There are, however,
several exceptions, which are covered in the scenario rules in
the Battle Book.

4.2 How AMs are Used

(4.21) Unless otherwise indicated in the scenario rules, each
Command that has at least one Combat Unit, either on the map or
available to enter as a reinforcement, will have that Command’s
AM(s) available for that turn. Most Commands have two AMs;
some have one for specific turns. The Initiative Player secretly
selects one of his available AMs for use as the first Command
to activate that turn. Then, all other available AMs chosen by
each player to be played this turn are secretly placed in an
opaque cup (or similar container)—The Pool—in the Marker
Selection Phase.

Questions?

Do you have any questions about play? Want a quick answer?
We can be reached on the Internet at www.GMTgames.com
or at www.Comsimworld.com
Or, we can also be reached at:

(4.25) COMBINED ACTIVATION: When there is more than one
Leader/Command activated by an AM, the player may choose to
attempt to combine more than one of those Commands so that
he may move/fight/rally with the units of all chosen Commands,
rather than one at a time, as in 4.24. To attempt this, the player
chooses which Leaders’ Commands under that AM he wants to
combine; each selected Leader must be within the Command
Range (use the range of either Leader) of at least one of the other
selected Leaders. The player then totals the Combined Activation Ratings of the chosen Leaders. He does not have to select
all Leaders under that AM. He then rolls the die, comparing it to
the total of the Combined Activation Ratings (i.e, total CA):
•	 If the die roll is higher than the total CA, the units of those
Leaders may all move/fight/rally as one (although stacking
rules still apply).
•	 If the die roll is the same as or lower than the total CA, the
units of those Leaders may not combine; they operate under
4.24. Moreover, they all act as if they are Out of Command
for that Activation (5.13).
Example: Cedar Creek: The Union Player has drawn his VI
Corps AM, and he wishes to combine the divisions of Getty (CA
of 2) and Ricketts (CA of 2). The total CA is ‘4’, so he would
need a DR of 5 or more to combine. If he rolls a ‘4’ or less, all
of Getty’s and Ricketts’ units are Out of Command.

Designer: BergBROG@comcast.net
Developer: JimDauphinais@aol.com
Publisher: GMTGames@aol.com
If you’re willing to wait, send your questions and a self-addressed stamped envelope, to:
GMT Games
ATTN.: Glory III
PO Box 1308
Hanford, CA 93232

(4.24) All the units under the command of a single Leader must
finish all their movement/combat/rallying before those of another
Leader may do so. Units of different Leaders may not be combined, unless the Player attempts a Combined Activation.

(4.26) When all the Commands of the drawn AM have finished
their actions, that AM is set aside and a player draws another
AM, repeating the 4.23 process.

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg

Glory III



5. LEADERSHIP

6. MOVEMENT

(5.11) LEADERS IN GENERAL: Each side has Leaders that
command groups of combat units, usually a brigade or division,
depending on the battle and the side. The Leaders may be at the
same level of Command as the AM (e.g., both sides at Monocacy
Junction), or they may be at one level lower (e.g., the division
commanders at Antietam, where the AM are at Corps Level).
Leaders are not combat units and do not have a Facing (7.11).

(6.11) MOVEMENT ALLOWANCES: Each unit has its basic
Movement Allowance (MA) printed on its counter. When a
Command is activated, each unit in that Command may move
up to its printed MA. Units may always move less than their
printed MA.

5.1 Leaders and Command Control

(5.12) Leaders have three Ratings:
•	 Command Range; see 5.13.
•	 Combined Activation; see 4.25
•	 Movement Allowance; see 6.11.
(5.13) COMMAND RANGE: The Command Range is used
to determine whether that Leader’s combat units are In or Out
of Command. Range is counted in Movement Points (not just
hexes); those MP costs are determined under the Leader column
on the Terrain Chart.
•	 Units that start their activation within a Leader’s Command
Range are In Command and can function at full efficiency;
they are not restricted.
•	 Units that start their activation outside the Leader’s Command
Range are Out of Command; they may not move adjacent to
an enemy unit. If they start the turn adjacent, they are free to
do what they want (other than moving adjacent).
•	 Command Range is counted from Leader to unit. It cannot be
traced through enemy Combat Units. It may be traced adjacent
to enemy Combat Units.  Pike/Road/Trail costs (6.22) cannot be used for tracing command in hexes adjacent to enemy
Combat Units.
(5.14) Units outside their Leader’s Command Range but adjacent
to a unit from the same Command that is In Command, are treated
as being In Command. Note that this rule allows a chain of units
to be In Command as long as one unit in the chain is within the
Leader’s Command Range.
(5.15) Leaders cannot be killed. If “attacked” (an enemy unit
seeks to enter a hex containing only a leader), simply move them
into a vacant or friendly-occupied hex. If all of a leader’s units
are Withdrawn/Eliminated, remove the leader (11.61).

5.2 Initiative

(5.21) In the Initiative Determination Phase, each player rolls the
die. If the Turn Record Track indicates, he adds to the die roll
the DRM indicated. High total has the Initiative for that turn. If
there is a tie, neither player has the Initiative and all available
AMs selected by each player go into The Pool and Phase 3.A.2
is skipped.
(5.22) In certain turns of some battles, one player is given automatic Initiative; see the Battle Book for the rules.
(5.23) The Player with the Initiative may pre-select (choose
specifically) the AM he wants to start that turn.

6.1 Movement in General

(6.12) PROCEDURE: All units move separately and individually, even if they start stacked. As a unit moves it traces a path
of contiguous hexes through the hex grid, paying the cost of
each hex entered. You must complete the movement of one unit
before moving another. A Combat Unit’s Facing (7.1) has no
effect on how or where it may move unless it is stacked with
another Combat Unit (7.1).
(6.13) EXTENDED MOVEMENT: Any unit, except for dismounted cavalry and any Disordered unit, may use Extended
Movement at any time, as long as the unit does not start or move
within two (2) hexes of an enemy Combat Unit. If it wishes to
move closer (or adjacent) to an enemy Combat Unit it must use its
normal MA. Dismounted cavalry and Disordered units may not
use Extended Movement. When using Extended Movement:
•	 Infantry increases its MA by two (+2)
•	 Regular Artillery increases its MA by three (+3)
•	 Cavalry, Horse Artillery, and Leaders increase their MA by
four (+4)
Play Note: A unit can use only one type of Movement during
any given AM. It cannot start using Extended and then switch
to Normal.
(6.14) ENEMY UNITS: Units that move adjacent to an enemy
combat unit must cease movement for the rest of that activation,
unless the hexside separating the opposing units is not crossable
by either. Units that start their activation adjacent to an enemy
Combat Unit, where the hexside separating the opposing units
is crossable by either, may move, but they must stop as soon as
they enter another hex so adjacent. A unit may never move into
or through a hex containing an enemy combat unit.

6.2 Movement and Terrain

(6.21) Movement Point (MP) costs depend on unit type; see the
Terrain Effects Chart. A moving unit must have enough MPs to
pay the terrain cost of entering a hex; if it doesn’t, it may not
enter that hex.
Play Note: Horse artillery uses the MP costs under the Artillery
column. It also has the ability to Retreat before Charge (10.27)
as cavalry.
(6.22) PIKES, ROADS AND TRAILS: Units pay the Pike/Road/
Trail cost if they are entering that hex from a hex containing a
connecting Pike/Road/Trail hex; otherwise, they pay the cost of
the other terrain in the hex. Units may not use Pike/Road/Trail
costs to move adjacent to an enemy combat unit; they must use
the MP cost of the “other” terrain in the hex. Pike/Road/Trails
negate/reduce elevation costs just like they negate/reduce other
terrain costs.

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg



Glory III

(6.23) TRAILS: The cost to use Trails is one-half of the cost of
the other terrain in the hex, rounding up. Thus, an artillery unit
that would normally pay 3 MPs to enter a Woods hex would pay
2 MPs to use a trail through the woods and 1 MP for a Trail in
a Clear hex.
(6.24) RIVERS, CREEKS AND STREAMS: Certain river hexsides are not crossable, except by Ford or Bridge. See the various
battle rules. Roads or Trails do not negate the cost of crossing
streams or creeks unless a bridge or ford symbol is present. Note
that Fords and Bridges have their own MP costs.

6.3 Artillery Movement

(6.31) Artillery units may either Move or Fire during a single
activation; they may not do both.
(6.32) Artillery may not move adjacent to an enemy combat
unit, unless:
•	 There is already an infantry or cavalry unit in that hex (as per
6.12, they may not move together), or
•	 The hexside separating the opposing units is not crossable by
either. (Such as an uncrossable river hexside).

6.4 Stacking

(6.41) Stacking refers to having more than one unit in a hex at any
one time. The basic rule is: one combat unit per hex. However:
1.	One artillery (regular or horse) unit may stack on top of one
infantry/cavalry unit.
2.	Two artillery units (regular and/or horse) may stack together.
3.	Two infantry units, or dismounted cavalry units, with the same
Leader (second line of the counter) may stack together.
4.	Leaders and information markers stack “freely.”
(6.42) Stacking restrictions apply at all times, even during movement. However:
•	 One unit, at a time, may move through a hex containing a
single, friendly artillery or cavalry unit at no additional cost
in MP.
•	 One unit may always move through (not stay in the hex with)
another, single (friendly) infantry unit by paying +1 MP (in
addition to terrain) to do so. It does not pay this cost if it is
going to stay in the hex, if allowed as above (6.41).
•	 Leaders never pay any MP to move into or through any
units.

6.5 Reinforcements

(6.51) Reinforcements, where called for, enter the game when
their AM is drawn. (Thus, their AMs are available on the turn
they are scheduled to enter). They enter, by Command, through
the Entry hex stated in the scenario as if they were in a “column”
extending off the map: the second unit in that Command pays the
cost to enter plus that of the first, etc. If the reinforcements are
entering the map using normal movement or Extended Movement
(6.13), they may stack in the off-map “column” within the bounds
of normal stacking rules (6.4). If the entry area for a group for
reinforcements consists of multiple hexes that are adjacent, the
group of reinforcements may split their entry between the various hexes of that entry area in any manner the controlling player
desires. In the event there are multiple entry areas available for
a group of reinforcements, the player controlling the group of
reinforcements chooses which entry area will be used. All units
and Leaders of a given reinforcement group must enter through
the same entry area.
(6.52) Reinforcements unable to enter under one AM (usually no
room, too many other units in front of them, etc.) simply come
in the next AM for that Command. Reinforcements may not be
voluntarily delayed unless the Battle rules specifically allow it.
(6.53) No unit may enter or Charge any enemy Entry Hex until
after all enemy reinforcements that can enter through that Entry
Hex have entered the game.

7. FACING

7.1 Facing in General

(7.11) All combat units must be faced in a hex so that the top of
the unit (the side with its unit name) faces along one of the hexsides, as below. All units in a hex must be faced the same way.
The facing of stacked units may be changed as the Stack’s entire
Movement during its activation. The three hexes to the front are
called the Frontal Hexes, those behind, the Rear.

(6.43) An infantry unit moving into a hex with another infantry
unit, where stacking is allowed, is always placed at the bottom
of the Stack. That order may be changed only as a Stack’s entire
Movement during its activation. The same applies to dismounted
cavalry units when they are allowed to stack with another dismounted cavalry unit.

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg

Front
Front

Front

Rear

Rear
Rear

Glory III
(7.12) Facing has no effect on movement, and a unit is free to
change its facing at any time during and at the end of movement.
Units do not have to be facing a particular hex to enter that hex.
However:
• 	If an artillery or infantry unit begins movement stacked on top
of an infantry unit and wishes to exit the hex into a Rear Hex,
the unit must pay an additional MP to exit the hex.
• 	If an infantry unit begins movement stacked under another
infantry unit and wishes to exit the hex into a Frontal Hex,
the unit must pay an additional MP to exit the hex.
(7.13) Units may Charge or Fire only through their three frontal
hexes.
(7.14) Activated artillery can change facing (without leaving the
hex) and Fire in the same phase. They may also change facing
one hexside to Return Fire (9.13). However, an artillery unit may
never change its facing using either of these two methods when
it is stacked with an infantry or cavalry unit. Furthermore, an
artillery unit stacked with another artillery unit may change facing
using one of these two methods only if it is using Combined Fire
(9.3) in which case the two artillery units change facing together.
Artillery may not change facing to Defensive Fire (10.3).

8. COMBAT
There are three types of combat: Artillery Fire, Charge and
Defensive Fire. Infantry and cavalry Charge; artillery cannot
Charge—they Fire. Defending infantry, dismounted cavalry, and
artillery that are being charged may use Defensive Fire.
Design Note: Most combat in the Civil War consisted of shortrange firefights. Charging and engaging in face-to-face, hand-tohand melee was, while not rare, somewhat unusual— more so as
the war progressed. The game term “Charge” covers all of this
in one handy die roll (plus the defending unit’s reaction).

9. ARTILLERY FIRE



(9.13) RETURN FIRE: Artillery may fire at an enemy artillery
unit that has fired at it in that phase, but only once per enemy
Activation Phase, regardless how many times it is fired at. Return Fire is considered to take place simultaneously. Results are
applied after all units have fired. Return Fire affects all units in
the targeted artillery unit’s hex if those units can be affected by
Artillery Fire (9.22).
Play Note: When being charged, artillery uses Defensive Fire;
see 10.3. This is not Return Fire, so an artillery unit fired at by
an enemy battery may Return Fire and then may use Defensive
Fire if charged.

9.2 Procedure

(9.21) Artillery may Fire at any target within its Range and Line
of Sight. Artillery firing at a range of two hexes or more—counted
from guns to target, not counting the hex the firing unit is in— can
fire only if they can see the target (see 9.4: Line of Sight).
(9.22) To resolve Artillery Fire, roll the die and add or subtract
any modifiers (9.23). Then consult the Artillery Fire Table for
Results. The one die roll affects all units in the target hex except
when the target hex is adjacent to the firing artillery unit and
contains two infantry units. When the target hex is adjacent and
contains two infantry units, fire only affects the top unit in the
Stack if the fire entered through a Frontal hex, and only affects
the bottom unit in the Stack if the fire entered through a Rear
hex (7.11).
(9.23) DIE ROLL MODIFIERS: The following conditions provide modifiers to a Fire Die roll:
•	 The firing unit’s Fire Strength
•	 Range Effects (See the Artillery Range Chart for each
	 battle)
•	 Terrain (see the Terrain Effects Chart)
•	 Combined Fire (9.3)
These modifiers are cumulative.

9.3 Combined Fire

9.1 In General

If two artillery units are stacked in the same hex, they may combine fire. To do so, use the higher Strength and then add two (+2)
to the die roll. If the two units are of different Range/Type (9.11),
then use the least beneficial (worst) Range DRM, if the latter is
different for each unit. Two artillery units of different commands
that are stacked may combine fire, but they may only fire together
once under either of the two commands, not both.

(9.12) WHEN: Artillery units may Fire once when activated
(Activation Fire). They may Return Fire (9.13) once during each
enemy Activation Phase (i.e., once per enemy AM). They may
also use Defensive Fire (10.3) (against any, some, or all units
charging it) once during each enemy Activation (i.e., once per
Leader/Command or Combined Activation). However, Disordered artillery may not fire.

Example: [Chancellorsville]. An “M” unit is stacked with an
“L” unit, and they both want to combine fire at a target that is 5
hexes distant. The DRM would be +2 for combined fire, but –1 for
the range effect of the “M” guns (not the “0” for the “L”s).

(9.11) RANGE: There are three types of artillery units, delineated by range: Short (S), Medium (M), and Long (L). Each
type has the capability of firing at targets that are more than one
hex away, but the allowable distance differs by type. As per
the Artillery Range Chart, the farther away a target is, the more
negative the DRM.

9.4 Line of Sight (LOS)

LOS is traced from the center of the firing hex to the center of
the target hex.

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg



Glory III

If the firer and target are on the same level, the LOS is clear
unless:
•	 An intervening hex, regardless of its contents, is at an elevation
level higher than the firer and target; or
•	 An intervening hex at the same elevation level contains Woods
or a Combat Unit.
If the firer is higher than the target, the LOS is clear unless:
•	 An intervening hex, regardless of its contents, is at the same
elevation level or higher than the firer;
•	 An intervening hex containing Woods is at an elevation level
only one level lower than the firer;
•	 An intervening hex containing Woods is at the same or higher
elevation level than the target and halfway or closer to the
target; or
•	 An intervening hex at a higher elevation level than the target
is exited through a steep or sheer hexside that is closer to the
target than the firer.
If the target is higher than the firer, the LOS is clear unless:
•	 An intervening hex, regardless of its contents, is at the same
elevation level or higher than the target;
•	 An intervening hex containing Woods is at an elevation level
only one level lower than the target;
•	 An intervening hex containing Woods is at the same or higher
elevation level than the firer and halfway or closer to the firer;
or
•	 An intervening hex at a higher elevation level than the firer is
entered through a steep or sheer hexside that is closer to the
firer than the target.
In all cases, if LOS is traced along a hexside that borders any
of the above blocked LOS on either side, the LOS is considered
blocked.
Play Note: Only some battlefields have steep and/or sheer
slopes (e.g., Antietam has both; Cedar Creek has steep slopes;
and Chancellorsville, Chickamauga, Fredericksburg, Manassas and Salem Church have neither). The vertices of a steep or
sheer slope hexside are considered to be part of the steep or
sheer slope hexside.

9.5 Misguided Friendly Fire

(9.51) The presence of units between a firing unit and target,
where one of the latter is higher than the intervening units, does
not block LOS, regardless of the relative positions of the three.
However, if an intervening, occupied hex is adjacent to the target
hex, and the occupying units are friendly to the firing unit, there
is a possibility that the artillery fire hits those friendly units, not
the target.
(9.52) If the unadjusted Fire die roll is ‘2’ or less, then each
intervening friendly unit adjacent to the target hex undergoes a
CCDR, to which you add two (+2). If that adjusted DR is higher
than an unintended target’s Cohesion, that unit is Disordered.  
Regardless, the Fire has no effect on the original target.

10. CHARGE
10.1 In General

(10.11) WHO MAY CHARGE: An active infantry or cavalry
unit that is not Disordered may Charge any enemy unit(s) in its
Frontal hexes. Infantry/dismounted cavalry and artillery units
that are the target of a Charge may use Defensive Fire (10.3) to
try to stop the Charge. Units may not, nor are ever required to,
charge across or into terrain they are prohibited from crossing or
entering using normal movement. Charges must be designated
by the attacking player such that no more than one of the players has more than one Stack involved in each Charge. See 11.14
when charging artillery alone.
(10.12) COVERING: If there is more than one enemy in its
Frontal Hexes, a unit must Charge all such units if it does choose
to attack, unless the enemy unit(s) is (are) in the Frontal hexes
of any other friendly unit. Enemy units so “covered” by other
friendly units do not have to be Charged. However:

B
A

D

Example: Antietam Map: LOS is blocked from 2313 to 2311.
LOS is blocked from 2012 to 2010 through 2000. LOS is blocked
from 4617 to 4613 through 4609. LOS is clear from 4617 to 4608
through 4600. LOS is blocked from 2110 to 2409 through 2508.
LOS is clear from 2110 to 2608 through 2707.
Example: Chancellorsville Map: LOS is blocked from C-4116
to C-4114. LOS is blocked from C-4217 to C-4615 through
C-6008.
Example: Fredericksburg Map: LOS is blocked from F-5422 to
F-5413 through F-5402. LOS is clear from F-5422 to F-5401
through F-5400.

C

X
Y

Z

Example of Covering: McLaws division is activated. Units Y
and Z will charge unit D, while unit X charges units A, B and
C. Unit X is covering for unit Y so he does not have to charge
unit C. Note that even if unit X did not charge units A, B and
C, unit X would still be covering unit C for unit Y such that
unit Y does not have to charge unit C.

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg

Glory III



•	 Artillery and Disordered units may not be used to Cover
•	 Units from different Commands/Leaders may not cover for
each other unless they are using Combined Action.
•	 The bottom unit in a Stack cannot be used to Cover.

potentially lower odds (and revised DRMs) with the remaining
units from hexes with top units that have not been Disordered
(10.35), even if such units are no longer adjacent to other units
involved in that same combined charge.

Design Note: The “covering” units are keeping those enemy
units busy with their presence, usually in the form of sporadic
fire, etc.

(10.25) COHESION DIFFERENTIAL: The attacker subtracts the
defender’s best Cohesion rating from his best, and the difference
is the DRM. The maximum DRM is usually +/–3; however, when
mounted cavalry is charging any defender in a Woods hex, the
maximum Cohesion benefit it may get is +1. Obviously, if the
defender’s Cohesion is better than the attacker’s, that DRM will
be a negative. Artillery Cohesion ratings have no effect here;
they are not used in this determination.

Play Note: Covering units do not have to Charge; their simple
presence keeps the attention of the covered enemy units away
from the other attacks. Also, the covered enemy units remain
covered even if the covering unit is subsequently Disordered
(11.12) due to Defensive Fire (10.3).

10.2 Resolving a Charge

(10.26) CAVALRY CHARGES: Mounted cavalry gets a +1 
DRM when Charging infantry, but only if it moved at least one
hex during the phase (3.C.2.a.iii), and none of the hexes entered
cost more than 2 MPs.

Play Note: This becomes important when Defensive Fire (10.3)
disorders a charging unit, forcing any others charging along
with it to attack at lesser odds.

(10.27) RETREAT BEFORE CHARGE: When defending,
mounted cavalry (and Horse artillery), even if Disordered, may
retreat one or two hexes before being Charged by infantry (but
not mounted cavalry). The retreat must place them farther away
from the attacker than when they started the retreat, and they
may not retreat into a hex adjacent to an enemy unit or occupied
by any units, unless the Stacking rules would normally allow
that. The Charging infantry may advance (as per 11.3) into the
vacated hex.

(10.21) The attacking player must designate all charges, and all
units participating, before resolving any charges.

(10.22) To determine the outcome of a Charge, the attacking
player rolls the die and adjusts that die roll by the following:
+/–?	 Charge Strength odds/ratio (10.23)
+/–?	 The Difference between the two highest-rated Cohesion
units on each side (10.25)
+/–?	 Terrain of Defender (see 10.4).
	 +1	 If Charging through Defender’s Rear hexside
	 +2	 If a Combined Charge through both Front and Rear
	 +1	 Mounted Cavalry charging infantry (10.26)
	 –1	 Charging Stack includes dismounted cavalry
(10.23) CHARGE ODDS RATIO: To determine the DRM for
odds/ratio, each player totals the Strength of all his units involved
in the Charge (10.24). The attacker then compares the strength
of his units with that of the defending units, stated as an odds
ratio reduced to its simplest form and rounded off in favor of
the Defender. Thus, a 9-point unit Charging an enemy 4-point
unit would undertake a Charge at 2-to-1. If it were a 5 SP unit
Charging a 7 SP unit, it would round off to 1-to-1 1/2 (listed as
2 to 3). See the Odds/Ratio Chart for the applicable DRMs, and
see 10.4 for an important Terrain effect on Odds Ratios.
(10.24) COMBINED CHARGE: Charging units may combine
their strengths and capabilities if they are stacked, or in adjacent
(to at least one of the other Charging units) hexes. If not, and if
they are separated by an intervening hex, each Charge is resolved
separately, the order of which is up to the attacking player.
However, mounted cavalry may not combine their attack with
infantry or dismounted cavalry, even if adjacent. If a unit at the
bottom of a Stack is going to charge, it must combine its charge
with the unit it is stacked under.
Play Note: If the top unit in one or more hexes involved in a
combined charge is Disordered (11.12) due to Defensive Fire
(10.3), the charge is still resolved as a combined charge at

(10.28) ARTILLERY: Artillery never participates in Charge. Its
strength is used only for Fire.
•	 If stacked with a Charging Unit, and the Charging Unit “loses”,
the artillery is Disordered and must Retreat, if required by
the result. If the Charging Unit wins, the artillery may not
advance.
•	 If defending with one or more cavalry or infantry units and
the latter units “lose”, the artillery must retreat and check for
Disorder.
•	 If defending without any cavalry or infantry units, it is automatically eliminated.  No Charge Resolution is required.  Also
see 11.14.
Play Note: Artillery is considered to be defending with a cavalry
or infantry unit if both are defending against the same Charge.
Thus, if any artillery unit and an adjacent infantry unit are together being Charged by the same enemy Stack, the artillery is
considered to be defending with infantry even though the artillery
unit is not stacked with the infantry unit.
(10.29) RESULTS: The possible results of a Charge are dependent on the adjusted die roll (see the Charge Table ). Results on
the Charge Resolution Table apply to all affected units (either
attacker or defender, depending on the result with all required
cohesion checks being rolled separately for each affected unit).
The attacking player can resolve his Charges in any order he
desires, but all Defensive Fire must be resolved prior to any rolls
being made for the resolution of any Charges.

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg

10

Glory III

10.3 Defensive Fire (DF)
(10.31) WHO MAY USE DF: Any infantry, dismounted cavalry, or non-disordered artillery unit that is being Charged may
use Defensive Fire against the Charging units to try to stop the
Charge. Mounted cavalry may not use Defensive Fire. Nor may
Horse Artillery that chooses to Retreat Before Charge (10.27).
(10.32) FACING AND MULTI-HEX DF: Defensive Fire is directed through the defending unit’s Frontal Hexes only. However,
it may be used against all enemy units charging through such
hexes, even if there is only one defending unit using Defensive
Fire. (And see 10.36.) If units are charging a defending hex from
multiple frontal hexes, the defender may use Defensive Fire once
at one, some or all such hexes. However:
•	 For infantry using Defensive Fire, subtract one (–1) for each
charging target hex greater than one being fired at. Example:
DF against 3 charging units could have the defending unit fire
at only one hex (no DRM), at two hexes (with a –1 DRM for
each), or against all three hexes (with a –2 DRM for each).
•	 For artillery using Defensive Fire, if firing at enemy unit(s)
charging from only one hex, there is a +2 DRM. If firing at
more than one, there is no DRM for any.

A

B

(10.33) RESOLVING DF: To determine the effects of Defensive
Fire, for each target hex the defending player rolls a die and compares it to the Cohesion of the top infantry/cavalry unit in that
target hex. He does not use any ratings on the defending firing
unit, making adjustments to the DR as per 10.34:
•	 If the adjusted DR is higher than the charging unit’s Cohesion,
the latter is Disordered (and cannot complete the Charge; see
10.11).
•	 If the adjusted DR is the same as or lower than the charging
unit’s Cohesion, there is No Effect.
(10.34) DF DRMS: The possible adjustments to a DF die roll:
	 +2	 If the target/charging unit is mounted cavalry
	 +2	 Artillery defensive firing at units in only one charging
hex
	 –?	 If infantry/dismounted Cavalry is using DF against more
than one charging hex, add a –1 for each DR for each target
greater than one (10.32).
	 +2	 Non-disordered Artillery stacked with infantry/dismounted
Cavalry
	 +2	 Two non-disordered Artillery units stacked in the same
hex using DF at units in only one charging hex.
	 –1	 If the top unit in a defending/firing Stack is an infantry/
dismounted Cavalry unit that is Disordered
	+/–?	 Terrain. See the Terrain Effects Chart.
All adjustments applicable to a particular target hex are cumulative; the cumulative DF adjustment for each target hex may be
different.

C
D

B
A

C

X

D
Y

Z
X

Example Continued:
The defender (Union player) conducts his Defensive Fire
(DF) first, before the attacker (Confederate) conducts his
Charges. Units A, B and C use DF against unit X. There are
no applicable DRMs. All three DFs require a die roll of 8 or
9 to Disorder the attacker. Two are successful, resulting in
two Disorder results against unit X—causing it to Withdraw.
Unit D could DF against both units Y and Z with a –1 modifier, but in this case it is better to just DF against Y (a –1
modifier would make it impossible to hit Z with a cohesion
rating of 8). The die roll is a 7 which is unsuccessful (a die
roll of 8 or 9 was necessary). This concludes the Defensive
Fire for these units.

Y

Z

Example Continued:
After Defensive Fire the two Confederate units may conduct
their charge. Note that Unit X was removed to the Withdrawn
Box. The strength/odds ratio is 9 to 6 (3–2) which provides
a +1 DRM. The difference between the two highest cohesion
levels is three which provides a +3 DRM. There are no other
applicable DRMs. A die roll of 5 is modified to 9 which results
in the Union unit retreating and undergoing a CCDR. Unit
Z must advance.

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg

Glory III
Play Note: Stacked units eligible to DF must do so together at
the same target hex(s) with a single die roll for each target hex.
When two infantry/dismounted Cavalry units are stacked, the
bottom unit contributes no positive or negative DRMs to DF
even if the bottom unit is disordered.
(10.35) TOP UNIT AFFECTS STACK: When Defensive Firing
against a hex with stacked units, DF affects only the top Charging unit. However, if that unit is Disordered, none of the units in
that hex may Charge (even though the bottom unit in the Stack
is not actually Disordered).
(10.36) MULTIPLE DISORDER RESULTS: When units in a
single hex are Charging multiple hexes of defenders, the defending player makes a separate die roll for each defending Stack
choosing to use Defensive Fire. In such a case, Disorder results
(11.1) can be cumulative.

10.4 Terrain and Charge

(10.41) THE CLEAR TERRAIN DRAWBACK: If, in determining Terrain DRM for a Charge, there is no DRM favorable to the
defender—this usually occurs when opposing units are on the
same level and the Defender is infantry in Clear Terrain—then,
when determining Odds Ratio, players round leftover fractions
up in favor of the attacker, not the defender.
Example: 7 SP Charging 3 SP, both on the same level with the
defender in Clear Terrain, would be rounded up to 3–1.
Design Note: This reflects the reality of the drawback of defending out in the middle of “nowhere” vis a vis the style of warfare.
Note that when a charging unit is in Clear Terrain, the defender
gets a +1 DRM when using Defensive Fire.
(10.42) STREAMS: As noted in the individual battles, streams
usually have no effect, in terms of DRM, on charge. However, if
any attacking unit is charging across such a stream, the attacker
does not get the benefit of 10.41 for that Charge. A Stream does
not affect Defensive Fire across it into a Clear terrain hex.
(10.43) If attackers are charging from/into hexes that would give
different DRM, the defender receives the single most beneficial
cumulative DRM (for the defender).
Example: In Antietam, a single infantry unit Charges two enemy
infantry units that are in adjacent hexes at an odds ratio of 1:1
and a cohesion differential of zero. One of the defending units is
located in clear terrain that is one level lower than the Charging
unit (a cumulative DRM of +1). The other defending unit is in
a Woods hex that is at the same level as the Charging unit, but
this defending unit is being Charged through one of its Rear
Hexes (a cumulative DRM of +0). A DRM of +0 is applied to
the Charge Resolution DR since it is the single most beneficial
cumulative DRM for the defender.
(10.44) Defensive terrain benefits are cumulative. A unit in the
woods being attacked across a ford gets the benefit of both.

11

11. COMBAT RESULTS
11.1 Disorder

(11.11) A Combat Unit that suffers a Disorder result is flipped
to its Disordered side. If it is already Disordered it Withdraws.
Cavalry units without a Disordered side use a Disordered marker
to register that status; see 12.4.
(11.12) Disordered units:
•	 May not use Extended Movement
• 	May not move adjacent to an enemy combat unit.
• 	May not Charge, but see 11.14.
• 	Disordered infantry subtracts one (–1) from Defensive Fire
	 if it is the top Combat Unit in a firing Stack.
• 	Disordered artillery may not fire
• 	Disordered infantry/cavalry may not Cover (10.12)
• 	May not be moved to the top of a Stack when adjacent
	 to an enemy combat unit.
• 	May not change facing when adjacent to an enemy combat
unit unless they are exiting their current hex (7.1).
(11.13) Disordered units may be Rallied, 11.5.
(11.14) An infantry or cavalry unit that becomes Disordered
while Charging artillery that is not defending with an infantry
or calvary unit may not complete its Charge.  In such a case,
the defending artillery is not eliminated since the Charge was
not completed.  An infantry unit that is already Disordered that
starts its activation adjacent to artillery may Charge the artillery provided the infantry unit only Charges that artillery and it
“survives” any artillery Defensive Fire.

11.2 Retreat
(11.21) IN GENERAL: A combat unit that retreats must move
the required number of hexes away from the enemy unit that
caused the retreat. Stacked combat units that have to retreat may
retreat together or split up, at the player’s discretion. Retreated
units are free to change their facing at any time during and at the
end of their retreat, even if Disordered. Leaders do not retreat,
nor do they alone block an enemy advance or retreat into their
hex (5.15).
(11.22) LENGTH OF RETREAT: Infantry, dismounted cavalry, and artillery retreat one hex. Mounted cavalry and horse
artillery may retreat one or two hexes, at the retreating player’s
discretion.
(11.23) STACKING AND RETREATS: A retreating unit may
not enter a friendly, occupied hex, unless allowed by Stacking
rules. However, if it is allowed to do so, and the unit originally in
that hex will be subject to an enemy attack that phase, the retreating unit does not add its strength or presence to the defense. It
will, though, suffer any adverse effects that the unit with which
it is now stacked incurs. An infantry unit retreating into a hex
with another infantry unit, where stacking is allowed, is always
placed at the bottom of the Stack conforming to the facing of
the top unit (6.43).

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg

12

Glory III

(11.24) TERRAIN AND RETREATS: Retreating units may not
cross a hexside that it could not cross during normal movement.
If it must retreat as a direct result of combat across a Ford or
Bridge, it suffers an automatic Disorder after, and in addition
to, any other mandated Disorder. However, for Streams (10.42),
Fords do not cause an automatic disorder and Bridges subject
only artillery units to an automatic disorder.
Play Note: As with the Streams rule (10.42), the Terrain and
Retreats rule above is the general rule. Scenario rules in the
Battle Book or the Terrain Effects Chart for a scenario may
modify these general rules.
(11.25) ENEMY UNITS: A unit may retreat into a hex adjacent
to an enemy unit, but if that hex is an enemy Frontal Hex (7.11)
the retreating unit suffers an automatic (additional) Disorder
result for each such hex entered. Any cohesion check required
as a result of the attack that initiated the retreat is taken prior to
the automatic (additional) disorder result.
(11.26) DISPLACEMENT: If a unit’s only valid path of retreat
is into a hex with a friendly unit with which it cannot stack, the
player may Displace the stationary unit by retreating that unit
one hex and having it undergo a Cohesion Check DR. If it fails,
it suffers a Disorder. This may be done as many times as necessary to effect the retreat. Displaced units may force other units to
displace, in a chain reaction. Displaced units may move into an
enemy Frontal hex, but suffer the results (11.25) of doing so.
Play Note: It is possible that Displacement may cause a declared
Charge to not take place, by displacing the unit that was to attack, etc.
(11.27) ELIMINATION: If a unit does not have a valid retreat
path it is permanently eliminated unless it is able to retreat off
the map in which case it is Withdrawn (11.4).

11.3 Advance
(11.31) PROCEDURE: If a defender vacates its hex (retreats,
withdraws or is eliminated) as a result of a Charge, the Charging unit with the highest Cohesion, that is stacked on top, must
advance immediately into the vacated hex. Ties? Attacker’s
choice. Only the top Charging unit may advance in a Stack—a
bottom Charging unit may never advance. Artillery stacked with
infantry never advances. Advancing units may change facing
after advancing. If defenders in two hexes are attacked from
one hex and both defenders retreat, the attacker must pick one
hex to advance into.
(11.32) CONTINUED ATTACK: If the adjusted Charge Resolution DR was 11 or higher, the Charging unit that advanced, as per
11.31, may Charge any enemy units it now finds in its Frontal
hexes, as per 10.1. Only one Continued Attack is allowed. If the
unit undertaking a Continued Attack rolls an 11 or higher (again),
there is no additional Continued Attack. Continued Charges are
resolved after all other, standard, attacks are resolved.

(11.33) COUNTER-ATTACK: When the adjusted Charge Resolution DR is “less than 0”, forcing the attacker(s) to retreat, the
defending non-artillery Combat Unit(s) may, if they so choose,
advance into the vacated hex and counter-charge any one hex of
retreating units, ignoring any other enemy-occupied hexes in the
process. Such counter-charges are undertaken immediately and
resolved like normal attacks, except that any subsequent CounterCharge/Attack or Continued Attack results are ignored.
Play Note: When a Continued Attack or Counter-Attack occurs,
the charge is affected by Defensive Fire (10.3), but only from new
defending units that were not involved in the original combat that
produced the Continued Attack or Counter-Attack result.

11.4 Withdrawal

Design Note: The word “Rout”, originally used in the Glory I
Series Rules, seemed to confuse some gamers; they envisioned
bug-eyed soldiers streaming away from battle, tossing aside
anything they could to gain speed. That’s not what we wanted
to “simulate.” So we changed the word. Withdrawal refers to a
unit’s inability to stay in combat, whether from losses, fatigue,
or simply it’s just “had it.”
(11.41) A Disordered unit that suffers an additional Disorder
Withdraws. When a unit Withdraws, it is immediately removed
from play and placed in that side’s Withdrawn Box, regardless
of its situation on the map.
Exception: If the unit is artillery (including horse artillery), it
is, instead, eliminated and not eligible for Recovery.
(11.42) In the Recovery Phase (3.D.2), all units in the Withdrawn
Box are moved into the Recovery Box. See 11.6.

11.5 Rally
(11.51) Disordered units that have not charged, moved or Fired
may undertake Rally attempts at the end of their Command
Activation Sequence, after all movement and combat has been
completed. Units adjacent to an enemy unit may not undertake
Rally.
Play Note: “No Rally” markers have been included in Glory III.
These may be used to help remember which Disordered units
are not eligible to undertake rally attempts.
(11.52) To rally a unit, roll the die.
•	 If the DR is the same as or lower than its (Disordered) Cohesion flip to its full strength side and, if not stacked with another
combat unit, reface as desired.
•	 If the DR is higher than its (Disordered) Cohesion, nothing
happens.
(11.53) Leaders have no effect on Rally.

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg

Glory III

11.6 Recovery

13

12.2 Mounted Cavalry

(11.61) IN GENERAL: In the Recovery Phase (3.D.1), all
Withdrawn units in each player’s Recovery Box are eligible for
Recovery (and return to the game). If an entire Command (all
units: both infantry and artillery) has been Withdrawn/Eliminated; none of its units are eligible for Recovery. That Command
is out of the game.

Mounted cavalry may Charge, and, if doing so against infantry/
dismounted cavalry, earn a +1 DRM provided the requirements
of 10.26 are met. They may not use Defensive Fire, though.
They may retreat before being charged by infantry/dismounted
Cavalry, as per 10.27.

(11.62) PROCEDURE: To check for Recovery, the player may
roll the die for each unit so eligible, comparing the DR to the
unit’s Disordered Cohesion Rating. There are no adjustments.
If the DR is the same as or lower than the Cohesion, the unit is
returned to the game, as per 11.64. If the DR is higher than the
Cohesion, the unit is Eliminated, permanently.

Dismounted cavalry is treated like infantry. However, they may
not use Extended Movement, and, when Charging, incur a –1 
DRM for so doing, even if combined with regular infantry.

(11.63) Cavalry always uses its mounted (Disordered) Cohesion
rating for Recovery, even if it was Withdrawn dismounted.
(11.64) Recovered units (that have a leader) are placed back on
the map as follows:
•	 Within their Leader’s Command Range.
•	 At least three (3) hexes from an enemy unit. If this is not possible, the Player must wait for a turn in which it is.
•	 Mounted if they are Cavalry.
•	 In Disordered status.
(11.65) Recovered units that are Independent—they do not have
a leader—must be placed per above except they may be placed
within Command Range of any Leader in that unit’s AM (since
they do not have a Leader) provided they are also being placed
behind their own lines (it sounds somewhat hazy, but your opponent will define it for you, we’re sure).

12. CAVALRY

12.1 To Mount or Dismount

Cavalry units have two states: Mounted and Dismounted. One
side of the counter is for mounted and the reverse is for dismounted. It costs two (2) MP to mount or dismount, and such an
action must be taken at the end of Movement. Simply flip counter
to the corresponding side. Cavalry may not mount/dismount when
adjacent to an enemy unit.
Play Note: For some battles, such as Antietam, Cedar Creek,
and Chickamauga, the counter mix provides separate dismounted
cavalry counters.

12.3 Dismounted Cavalry

Play Note: Any chart or rule that says “infantry” includes dismounted cavalry, except for the two above instances.

12.4 Disordered Cavalry

To note Disorder results on cavalry, use the Disorder markers.
•	 All Disordered mounted cavalry and Disordered dismounted
Union cavalry has a Cohesion Rating one lower than its printed
rating.
•	 Disordered, dismounted Confederate cavalry has a Cohesion
Rating two lower than its printed rating.
Play Note: This rules section does not apply to those battles, such
as Antietam and Cedar Creek, where the counter mix has allowed
the luxury of a disordered side for cavalry counters.

13. NIGHT
During Night Turns, the following changes are in effect:
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

It costs +1 to move adjacent to an enemy Combat Unit
No Artillery Fire at a Range greater than one hex (adjacent).
Mounted cavalry may not Charge.
+2 to all CCDR resulting from a Charge.
Units that advance after combat are automatically Disordered.
•	 Disordered Combat Units that do nothing and are not adjacent
to an enemy Combat Unit are automatically Rallied in the Rally
Phase.
•	 No Combined Activations are allowed.
•	 Players may roll for Recovery of Withdrawn units only during Night 2 Turns. Withdrawn units die rolling for Recovery
during Night 2 Turns are not eliminated if that DR is higher
than their Cohesion (11.62); they simply do not Recover and
are eligible to try again.

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg

14

Glory III

14. REFITTING GLORY I
Gamers may use these 3rd Edition rules, along with the additional (needed) counters from Glory II: Across the Rappahannock, as delineated below, to play the original Glory (1995)
battles, with changes/additions as noted.

[CLARIFICATION] [6.22] On the Manassas map, roads /trails
negate/reduce the movement costs of RR Embankments, but
not the combat effects. And those combat effects work in both
directions.

14.1 General Rules

1st Manassas Scenario: [ADDITION] Sherman’s Brigade
sets up in 4009-4010, the E 3US in 4010

(14.11) Use the Victory rules from the original Glory.   For
artillery use the Artillery Range Chart for Fredericksburg and
Chancellorsville that was included in Glory II.  If available,
use the revised artillery counters for the original Glory that
are included in Glory III.  Otherwise:
•	 All artillery SPs are halved with fractions rounded down.
•	 Light Artillery is treated as Short Range Artillery.
•	 Field Artillery is treated as Medium Range Artillery.
For Night Turns use the Glory III Night Rules (13.0) with the
following modifications:
•	 No Extended Movement is allowed.
•	 A +2 (yes, +2) DRM applies to all Defensive Fire.
•	 Recovery can occur as if it were a Night 2 Turn.
Design Note: Artillery units went from 2-3 guns per SP in
the original Glory to around 3-4 guns per SP starting with
Glory II.
(14.12) Use the Terrain Effects Charts provided for Manassas
and Chickamauga in Glory II; they replace the ones in Glory I
(and take into account the changes in mechanics).
(14.13) Except as noted above, all Glory III Series Rules and
combat tables are used and none of the Glory I Series Rules
are used. Example: the Commitment DR on the Glory I AM
are ignored.

[CLARIFICATION] While the Warrenton Pike negates
streams for movement, it does not do so for Charge.
[CLARIFICATION] Hex 3635 is not a CSA Entrance Hex.
2nd Manassas Scenario: [CORRECTION] Set-up: Union
IIIv Corps units are facing “East”, and Gibbon ‘b’ is in 1518.
On the 29th, Hood arrives at 1015, not 1012.
[CLARIFICATION] 6.53 does not apply to hex 1020 until
0515, 8/29.	
Chickamauga Scenario: [CLARIFICATION] Starting September 19 (CSA Initial Deployment): Cheatham’s Division sets
up on “Road” hexes 2539-2342; Stewart’s Division on Trail
hexes 3234-3135, and the Wheeler cavalry starting within one
hex of 3329 is J. Wheeler’s brigade of Forrest’s division (not
Wheeler’s Division).
[ADDITION] Starting September 20 (Union Initial Deployment): Campbell, Watkin and Ray’s Cavalry start within 2
hexes of 1440.
[CHANGE to Victory Conditions]. Remove “last to occupy”.
Units must physically occupy a hex to control it.

(14.3) 1st Manassas Scenario Changes

(14.31) The Combined Activation rule (4.25) is not used. No
brigades may combine any actions.

(14.14) For infantry, use the larger Strength Point rating,
if there are two such ratings. Ignore the smaller rating. Example: for Sherman’s brigade at 1st Manassas, each unit has
a Strength of ‘8’.

(14.32) Ignore all the CSA AM, except for the Cavalry AM.
Instead, the CSA player gets two Beauregard AM, and two
Johnston AM, both of which are available at the start, which
apply as follows:

(14.15) Leader, AM, and dismounted cavalry (for Chickamauga) counters for all three original Glory battles are provided
in the counter mix for Glory II: Across the Rappahannock.

Beauregard: Cocke, Early, Evans, KBBH.
Johnston: Jackson, Bee, and Smith

(14.16) Dismounted cavalry counters are provided only for
Chickamauga. The dismounted rules are not used for either
Manassas battle.

(14.33) Leaders start (or arrive) stacked with any unit in their
command.

14.2 Errata Applicable to GLORY I

(14.34) There is no Leader for the KBBH group (CSA) and
both sides’ cavalry. Each of the brigades therein is considered
independent and always In Command. (Both Radford units
are in the same brigade). However, they may never combine
activations; each unit therein must complete its actions before
any other.

The Manassas Map: Thanks to information supplied by one
of our legion of fans, we determined that the two bridges near
Sudley Mill, over Catharpin Run—2404 and 2503—were
fords. Treat them as fords when playing.

(14.35) Use the Special Rule for Tyler’s Division; you may use
the Third Jackson AM, if you wish. The Third Jackson AM
activates all of Jackson’s infantry and artillery units.

The following is errata for Glory I (the section references are to
that version) that is still applicable to the 3rd edition rules:

(14.36) VP awarded for Victory for Routed units on map is
now given for units in Withdrawal Box.

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg

15

Glory III

14.4 2nd Manassas Scenario Changes

(14.41) The Combined Activation rule (4.25) is not used for
the Union. It is for the CSA.
(14.42) Ignore all the CSA AM (including the Artillery
AM), except for the Stuart AM (available at start). Instead,
the CSA player gets two Longstreet AM (available Aug 29,
1015 turn), and two Jackson AM (available at start). CSA
Corps assignments for divisions are on the Leader counters.
Moreover, for the 1745 turn of Aug 28, Hill and Ewell are
activated with the second Jackson AM drawn; Stuart activates
on the second Stuart AM drawn.
(14.43) CSA Artillery battalions are assigned, for AM purposes, as follows:
• Longstreet: Right Wing, S. Lee, Walton
• Jackson: Shumaker, Walker
(14.44) Leaders start (or arrive) stacked with any unit in
their command.
(14.45) 1st US Sharpshooters, Union. While nominally assigned to Morrel’s Division (1/V), the 1st US Sharpshooters may operate independently. It is activated when a V
Corps/Porter AM is drawn, but it does not have to be within
any leader’s range to be In Command. It also has some additional features:
•	 When it uses Defensive Fire, add one (+1) to the DF die
roll. If stacked with another unit, it must be on top to use
this.
•	 When alone in a hex, it may Retreat Before Combat, like
cavalry, but only one hex.
•	 When alone in a hex, it may not Charge.
•	 It may stack with any V/Porter Corps infantry unit as if
they were both in the same command.
•	 When stacked with another infantry unit, it may take part
in a Charge. In addition to adding in its 2 SP, it also provides
the Union Player with a +1 DRM to the Charge die roll.
(14.46) The Union cavalry has no leader; the units operate independently, and are always In Command, under the

Game Designer: Richard Berg
Game Developer: Jim Dauphinais
Preliminary Glory III Development: Paul Jordan
Glory II: Across the Rappahannock Developer: Mike
Shanovich
Original Glory Developer: Gene Billingsley
Art Director, Cover Art and Package Design: Rodger
B. MacGowan
Game Counters: Mark Simonitch
Rules Layout: Neil Randall

(sole) cavalry AM. However, the units of one brigade may
not combine with those of another.
Play Note: The ‘a’ and ‘b’ units are in the same brigade.
(14.47) VP awarded for Victory for Routed units on map is
now given for units in Withdrawal Box.

14.5 Chickamauga Scenario Changes

(14.51) Ignore all the Chickamauga AM in Glory I, except
for the Granger/Reserve and Mitchell/Cavalry AM (Union).
The players use, instead, the AM supplied with Glory II. AM
become available as per 4.21.
Optional: Players may choose to use the Chickamauga AMs
from Glory I if they would like to reflect a more fragmented
command structure.
(14.52) Leaders start (or arrive) stacked with any unit in their
command, with the exception of Union General Granger (Reserve), who enters the game as Reinforcement in the 0630,
Sept 19th game turn.
(14.53) The Confederate Reserve Artillery ‘a’ and ‘b’ units
are part of Buckner’s Corps, and may be activated with either
Stewart or Preston, that decision being made prior to each
turn. The Artillery Reserve ‘c’, part of Longstreet’s Corps,
may be so activated with either Johnson or Kershaw or Law.
Ignore the Artillery AM provided with Glory I.
(14.54) There are dismounted units for cavalry included with
Glory II, which are used as per the 3rd Edition Series rules.
(14.55) Use the following Special Rules from Glory I:
•	
•	
•	
•	

CSA Destination Designation
Special Terrain (but ignore references to Commitment)
Off-map Movement
Union Reserve Corps Restrictions

(14.56) Ignore the Special Rules on AM, Corps Activation
Markers, and Retreat direction.
(14.57) Wilder’s Brigade. Ignore the rule as printed in Glory
I. Instead, Wilder’s Brigade, when using Defensive Fire,
adds 3 (+3) to that DR. Wilder’s Brigade does not need to
be in range of Reynolds or any other leader in order to be
in Command.

Game Map: Leland Myrick
Production Coordination: Tony Curtis
Producers: Tony Curtis, Rodger B. MacGowan, Andy
Lewis, Gene Billingsley and Mark Simonitch
The Glory III Playtest Crew: Stephen Brasseur, Stephen
Clark, Brian Horvath, John Iverson, Tom Jones, Duncan
Lang, Mike Ollier and Arrigo Velicogna
Proofing: John Ellsworth, Brian Horvath, Vincent Lefavrais, Patrick McGovern, Fabio Patricolo, Rich Shay, Jeff
Twining and Dean Zadiraka

© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg

16

Glory III

SEQUENCE OF PLAY

LINE OF SIGHT

A. INITIATIVE DETERMINATION PHASE

Line of Sight is traced from the center of the firing hex to the
center of the target hex.

1.	Roll the die to see who goes first. (5.2)
2.	Initiative Player chooses which Command (AM) will start
the turn, holding out one of that Command’s AMs for the
first Activation. (4.21)

B. MARKER SELECTION PHASE
Place all other Activation markers for commands that are either on the map or scheduled to enter that turn in The Pool.

C. ACTIVATION PHASE
1. Draw Activation Marker from Pool. (Exception: 3.A.2)
2. Activation Sequence:
	 a. Command Activation Sequence (4.24)
		
i. Combined Activation attempt (4.25)
	 	
ii. Artillery Fire (9.0)
	 	
iii. Units Move (except for firing artillery) (6.0)
	 	
iv. Infantry/Artillery Defensive Fire (10.3)
	 	
v. Infantry/Cavalry Charge (10.2)
	 	
vi. Rally (for Disordered units that did none
	 	
	
of the above) (11.5)
	 	
vii. Remove “Artillery Fired-No Move” and
	 	
	
“No Rally” markers.
	 	
		
		
		

Repeat the Command Activation Sequence “2.a”
(Steps i through vii) until the Command of each
Leader activated by the current AM has completed
its activation.

b. Remove “Artillery Return Fired” markers.	
	 c. Set aside the AM drawn for that Phase.
Repeat the Activation Phase “C” until there are no markers
left in the Pool. When finished with all Activations go to the
Recovery Phase “D.”

D. RECOVERY PHASE
1.	All units in the Recovery Box may check for Return to the
game (11.6)
2.	All units in the Withdrawn Box are moved to the Recovery
Box.

RALLYING UNITS
•	 If the DR is the same as or lower than its (Disordered) Cohesion flip to its full strength side and, if not stacked with
another combat unit, reface as desired.
•	 If the DR is higher than its (Disordered) Cohesion, nothing
happens.

If the firer and target are on the same level, the LOS is
clear unless:
•	 An intervening hex, regardless of its contents, is at an elevation level higher than the firer and target; or
•	 An intervening hex at the same elevation level contains
Woods or a Combat Unit.
If the firer is higher than the target, the LOS is clear unless:
•	 An intervening hex, regardless of its contents, is at the same
elevation level or higher than the firer;
•	 An intervening hex containing Woods is at an elevation
level only one level lower than the firer;
•	 An intervening hex containing Woods is at the same or
higher elevation level than the target and halfway or closer
to the target; or
•	 An intervening hex at a higher elevation level than the target
is exited through a steep or sheer hexside that is closer to
the target than the firer.
If the target is higher than the firer, the LOS is clear unless:
•	 An intervening hex, regardless of its contents, is at the same
elevation level or higher than the target;
•	 An intervening hex containing Woods is at an elevation
level only one level lower than the target;
•	 An intervening hex containing Woods is at the same or
higher elevation level than the firer and halfway or closer
to the firer; or
•	 An intervening hex at a higher elevation level than the firer
is entered through a steep or sheer hexside that is closer to
the firer than the target.

DISORDERED UNITS
•	 May not use Extended Movement
• 	May not move adjacent to an enemy combat unit.
• 	May not Charge, but see 11.14.
• 	Disordered infantry subtracts one (–1) from Defensive 	
	 fire if it is the top Combat Unit in a firing Stack.
• 	Disordered artillery may not fire
• 	Disordered infantry/cavalry may not Cover (10.12)
• 	May not be moved to the top of a Stack when adjacent
	 to an enemy combat unit.
• 	May not change facing when adjacent to an enemy
	 combat unit unless they are exiting their current
	 hex (7.1).
• 	May be Rallied (11.5)

GMT Games  •  P.O. Box 1308
Hanford, CA 93232-1308  •  www.GMTGames.com
© 2007 GMT Games and Richard H. Berg

