HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

RULE BOOK
TAB LE O F C O N T E N T S

Introduction................................................................... 2
1.0 	 The Map.............................................................. 2
2.0	 The Blocks.......................................................... 3
3.0	 The Cards............................................................ 4
4.0	 Actions................................................................ 5
5.0	 Movement........................................................... 6
6.0	 Combat............................................................... 7
7.0	 Siege................................................................... 8
8.0	 Siege Combat...................................................... 9
9.0	 Winter............................................................... 10
10.0	 New Year.......................................................... 11
11.0	 Olympians......................................................... 12

12.0	 Peace of Nicias................................................. 12
13.0	 Persian Aid........................................................ 12
14.0	 Victory.............................................................. 13
15.0	 Scenarios........................................................... 13
	
15.1 The 431 Campaign................................... 13
	
15.2 The Sicily Campaign............................... 14
	
15.3 The 413 Campaign................................... 14
	
15.4 The 415 Campaign................................... 15
Strategy Notes............................................................. 15
Credits ........................................................................ 15	
Index	.......................................................................... 15
Charts and Tables ....................................................... 16

GMT Games, LLC
P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
www.GMTGames.com
© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

1

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

2

INTRODUCTION
Hellenes is a strategy game on the Peloponesian
War between the Athenian Empire and the
Spartan League, 431–404 BC. The object is to
amass Prestige by winning battles and capturing or pillaging opposing cities. 4 scenarios are
provided (playing times: 2–­6 hours). Players
can select sides randomly, or bid Prestige to
play a side. The Spartan player sits to the south,
the Athenian player to the north.

The Game Year

A Game Year consists of New Year plus 5
Seasons. Players get 6 cards per Year, playing
one card per NewYear/Season.

New Year (10.0)
Deal each player 6 cards. One is played immediately as a NewYear Event or Sacrifice (10.3).

Campaigning Seasons
Campaigning Seasons (Spring through Fall)
consist of an Initiative phase, followed by a
Player Turn (“turn”) for each side.

Initiative Phase (3.3)
To begin each Season the players each commit
one card face-down, then reveal them simultaneously. Cards have Action Values (coins) and
Events on opposite ends and can serve either
use but not both. Play the card with its intended
use upright from your point of view.
The lower Action Value takes the first Player
Turn (Events have zero Action Value). Sparta
goes first in case of ties.

Player Turns
The 1st Player does an Action phase and a Combat phase. Then the 2nd Player does the same.

• Action Phase (3.1, 4.0)
Events are resolved first. Playing an Event
means having no Actions that turn.
Action Values (coins) entitle a player to make
1–3 Actions that turn (possibly increased by a
Leader or Continuing Event). Actions include
Group Movement, Building, and Pillaging.

In Winter, units outside friendly-controlled Cities (including besiegers) need Maintenance (a
possible Winter Action). Units seeking Winter
shelter can usually move without Action cost,
but no new attacks are allowed.
Winter ends with a Year End procedure (9.5).

1.0 THE MAP
The map depicts ancient Greece and its environs, divided into land and sea areas.
•	Persia consists of Phrygia and Lydia.
•	Sicily includes all areas on the Sicily inset
map (including the Gulf of Rhegium).
•	Italy is Taras, Croton & adjacent seas.
•	The rest of the map area is Greece.

1.1 Land Areas
Black borders divide land areas, or Provinces.
Thick black borders divide Nations, and dashed
borders divide Provinces within a Nation.
A Province containing a City is known as a
CityState. All islands are playable.

1.2 Sea Areas
Blue lines separate Sea Areas. Thick DeepSea
borders are risky to cross (5.22). Double lines
show Narrows, which are easier to defend (6.5).

1.3 Cities and Towns
Cities [squares] and Ports [hexagons] are
color-coded by Nationality and contain City
Value numbers. City Capacity (in units) is
double the City Value.
Ports are Cities with fortified harbors. The Port
symbol projects into its single Offshore Sea,
to which it retains access even when Besieged
(7.2). When not besieged, units in a Province
have access to all adjacent seas.
Every City has an inherent immobile Garrison
(2.3) block that is only placed on the map as
needed (they are NOT units and do NOT count
against City Capacity).
Towns [colored circles] are barbarian centers
with no City advantages.

1.31 City Loyalty

Rulebook Organization
This running sidebar contains clarifications,
examples, and commentary. New changes are
in red. New edits for clarity are in blue.

Sequence of Play - Game Year
New Year
•	
•	

Deal 6 cards to each player
New Year Event / Sacrifice

Spring/ Summer/ HighSummer/ Fall
•	Initiative (card play)
•	1st Player Turn
Action Phase
•	 An Event occurs; OR
•	 Actions occur (any order):
Movement / Pillaging / Building
Combat Phase
Battles / Siege Combat
•	2nd Player Turn (as above)

Winter

•	Initiative (card play: NO Events)
•	1st Player Winter Actions
Wintering Movement
•	Homing to Home City (free)
•	Quartering to adj. City (free)
•	Group Moves (cost 1 Action)
Building
Winter Maintenance
Disbanding
•	(2nd Player repeats as above)
•	1st Player SiegeBreaking Combat
Homing Battles
(Win: enter City / Lose: Disband)

Sorties
•	(2nd Player repeats as above)
•	1st Player Siege Combat
Siege Assaults / Siege Attrition (triple)
•	(2nd Player repeats as above)
•	Year End
•	Tribute Collection
•	Victory Check
•	Advance Year marker
•	Collect & Shuffle cards

City Representation

• Combat Phase (6.0)

Cities with white outlines (green/blue/purple)
are loyal to Athens. Those with black-outlines
(red/orange/yellow) are Loyal to Sparta.

In the Combat Phase, battles and sieges for
disputed areas (i.e., units of both sides present)
are resolved one at a time, smallest battles first.

Cities retain their Loyalty regardless of occupation or control. Cities Loyal to the enemy are
termed Opposing Cities.

Winter Season (9.0)

White Cities are neutral and cannot be entered.
Some scenarios specify other neutral Cities.

Scenario instructions may specify additional
neutral CityStates for specific scenarios. Entry
into these is also prohibited.

1.32 City/Town Nationality

Offshore Seas -- clarifications

Winter follows a different play sequence.
•	Initiative
• Winter Actions:
Player 1 / Player 2 	
• SiegeBreaking Combat: Player 1 / Player 2
• Offensive Combat: Player 1 / Player 2.

Unit labels are also color-coded by Nationality
(the central symbol color).

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

Most CityStates contained several cities. Only
the most important is shown, but the given
City Value includes all cities.

Neutral CityStates

Leucas (Ambracia): Gulf of Ambracia
Lipara (Sicily): Tyrrhenian Sea

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War
A unit must be in a Home City (same color/
Nationality) to build up in strength. This is
crucial to game play.
Athenian Subject Cities are a lighter blue than
Attica (Athens/Platea): they are not the same
Nationality. Lacedaemon [red] and Corinth
[orange] are also different Nations.

1.33 Subject Regions

Subject Cities are grouped into Subject Regions
such as Ionia [see sidebar, p. 5]. Spartan controlled Subject Cities make other Cities within
that Region more likely to Revolt (3.12).

1.4 Area & City Control
City control governs Wintering (9.21) and
Tribute (9.51). Control of land and sea areas
affects Retreats (6.4). Control is re-evaluated
after each Action phase and Combat phase.
Controlled cities / areas are termed Friendly.
•	Sole occupation controls any area.
•	Vacant CityStates are controlled by the
side to which they are loyal (i.e., a conquered City left unoccupied reverts to its
original owner!)
•	Other vacant areas (including those containing towns) are uncontrolled.
•	In cases of Siege (7.0), both sides occupy
a CityState. Defenders controls the City;
besiegers control the surrounding Province.

2.0 THE BLOCKS
Wooden blocks represent pro-Spartan and proAthenian forces, including allies.
The large red and blue blocks are units, which
are mobile forces. A Spartan unit label must be
attached to the face of each large red block, and
an Athenian unit label to each large blue block.
Units normally stand upright, their identities
hidden from the opponent. This adds surprise
and bluff to the game.
Units available for a scenario but not currently
in play on the map are kept face-down in the
friendly Recruit Pool.
Smaller red/blue blocks are garrisons representing immobile City defenders (2.3). They
are unlabeled and not considered ‘units’.
Markers. Put Group marker A/B and S/T labels
on large blue and red blocks as per 2.41. Attach
Year, Prestige, Action, Civil War and Pillaged
marker labels to the large black, orange and
grey blocks as per 2.42.

2.1 Unit Labels
Labels show a unit’s Nationality, type, and
movement/combat abilities.
Greek units have one-color backgrounds [see
sidebar]. Greek units arrive in Home Cities at
minimum or cadre strength (1 cv) and remain
in play until eliminated.

Barbarian units have 2-color backgrounds
with dark tan predominant [Persians have light
tan predominant, see sidebar]. They arrive in
home towns (colored dots) at maximum cv, and
can make 1 free move from there, but disband
in the next Winter (9.24).
Sicilian units: (Greek/Barbarians with Home
Cities/towns in Sicily), have distinctive background label colors, with barbarians 2-colored
as above [see sidebar].
Unit ID numbers (1–60) are shown to aid setup.
For both sides, unit ID numbers are coded for
the Scenarios (15.0) in which they appear:
ID# 1–40		
ID# 41–46	
ID# 47+		

3

City Control
A CityState is always controlled by its original
owner unless occupied by an enemy block.
Besieged Cities are controlled by the defender.

Area Control
Areas are controlled by the occupying player.
Unoccupied areas that are not CityStates are
uncontrolled. In Sieges, the besieger controls
the land area of a CityState (i.e., its surrounding Province).

Units

431, 415 & 413
415 & 413 only
Sicily & 415 only

greeks

Units with ID#s in white boxes can only appear
under certain specified circumstances.

2.11 Unit Nationality

Each unit’s central symbol is color-coded to
match its Home Cities/towns. This is crucial
to game play. Only Nationality color-matching
matters: historical text names are for historical
interest only.

Pro-Sparta

Pro-Athens

barbarians

2.12 Combat Value

Units have 1–4 steps of strength, called Combat
Value or cv. A unit’s current cv is the number
on its top edge when standing upright.

Persia

Greece

sicilians

Combat Value dictates the number of dice (d6)
thrown for a unit in combat. A 4 cv unit attacks
with four dice (4d6); a 1 cv unit would roll 1d6.
For each step loss suffered, a unit is rotated 90
degrees counter-clockwise to its next lowest cv.
The sidebar shows a cavalry unit at 3, 2, and
1 cv strength. 1 cv is termed cadre strength.

Barbarian

Greek

2.13 Movement Range

Each label has a number in a box showing that
unit’s Movement Range in areas. Blue boxes
show sea movement, white boxes show land
movement. Red boxes show elite status with a
greater chance of moving 1 extra area by Forced
March/Sail (5.3).

2.14 Combat Rating

A unit’s Combat Rating is indicated by a letter
and number, such as A1 or B2.
Letters are unit Agility: “A” units attack before
“B” units, etc., with defenders of equal agility
preceding aggressors (defending “A”, then
aggressor “A”, etc).
The number is the unit’s power: its ability
to damage and/or Rout opposing forces in
combat (6.3).
Example: A unit rated B1 inflicts 1 hit on the
enemy for each 1 rolled. An A3 unit does this
for each 1, 2, or 3 rolled.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

Greece

Greek

unit data

Nationality
[color]

Combat Value
[maximum 4]

Name

Land
Combat
Rating

Unit Type
Unit ID#
Sea Combat Rating

(Red=Elite)
Land Movement (white)
Sea Movement (blue)

step reduction

4

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

2.2 Unit Types
2.21 Hoplites

Hoplite units are the main Greek
land forces, formed of tightly
packed armored spearmen that
fight as a unit (phalanx).
Elite hoplites (as above) have better Forced
March ability [red movement rating] and
quicker Agility.

2.22 Archers

Archer units also include other
missile land forces, like slingers
and javelinists. Combat rating
is A1, but maximum cv is low.

2.23 Cavalry

Cavalry is the fastest land unit,
with A1/A2 combat ratings.
Cavalry has special abilities in
Retreats (6.41), making it ideal
for scouting, blocking and raids.

2.24 Infantry

Infantry units represent lightly
armed land forces that are more
Agile (B1) in combat than (nonelite) hoplites, but less powerful.

2.25 Barbarians

Barbarians (includes Persians)
are large non-Greek land forces
that appear randomly and briefly
in play. They have 2-colored,
predominantly tan backgrounds
(shown), and are usually less Agile than equivalent Greeks.
They appear at full strength in home towns
and immediately make make one free move
from there, but must disband (9.24) in Winter.

2.26 Fleets

Fleets are the only units able to
move to sea, fighting there using
their sea combat rating [E or F].
They can each carry to sea 1
smaller (in cv) Greek land unit
(which cannot fight there).
Fleets can also occupy coastal land areas, fighting ther using their land combat rating [D1].
Fleets must stop upon entering a land area.
Elite fleets (above) have better Forced Sail
ability [red movement rating].

2.27 The Odrysians

The strong Odrysia barbarian
cavalry unit cannot appear if
an Athenian Leader is in play
[white box around #37]. Errata:
this label was printed without the white box
behind “Odrysia”.

2.3 Garrisons
Garrisons are small unlabeled 1/2” blocks
representing 1 cv City defense forces which
defend their City only (they cannot defend the
surrounding province or resist enemy movement through it). They are not represented on
the board until needed, but appear automatically in Cities that are Besieged (7.3) or that
Revolt [see sidebar]. Garrisons can also be built
in occupied opposing Cities (4.23) to control
them if mobile friendly units leave.
Garrisons are “blocks” but not “units”: they do
NOT count against City Capacity but DO count
as ‘defenders’ re Siege Attrition
dierolls.

2.4 Markers
2.41 Group Markers

Events
Revolt*: Place a Spartan garrison in a
qualified Subject City (must be vacant).
Helot Uprising*: Place Athenian garrison
in Sparta, Messenia or Pylos (if vacant).
[* = NOT playable as New Year Events.]
Plague Strikes: All units (except cadres) in
the specified besieged City lose 1 cv.
Plague Returns [Plague Strikes has occurred]: All units (except cadres) in the
specified City lose 1 cv (Siege unneeded).
Treachery: A Treachery Assault can be
made against 1 besieged City (others can
be Siege Attritioned), with defenders losing
double defense. However, assaulters must
Retreat if the City is not taken in a single
Combat Round (Capitulation is allowed).

Attach the label pairs lettered A & B to large
blue blocks and the S & T labels to large red
blocks. Use Group markers to relieve unit
congestion when desired. Remove a Group
off-map, placing a Group Marker block in its
location and its twin off-map with the removed
Group.

Leader Ostracized: A current enemy or
friendly Leader is deposed (return to deck).

2.42 Game Markers

Augury: Enemy units cannot Engage or
Assault this season (Siege Attrition OK).

The Year and Prestige labels go
on black blocks. Action marker
labels go on gray blocks, and Civil War / Pillaged marker labels go on orange blocks.

3.0 THE CARDS
Fifty five (55) cards are provided.
431 Campaign: Use only cards #1–44, with silver or gold borders and coins.
Sicily/415/413 Campaigns: Use only cards
#12–55, with silver or bronze borders/coins.
Each NewYear begins by dealing 6 cards facedown to each player.
Players play 1 card in the NewYear plus 1 per
Season (revealed simultaneously). Each card
has an Action Value and an Event, and may be
played for either purpose but not both (play the
card with the operative end upright from your
point of view).

3.1 Events
Events are always resolved before Actions.
They are not playable in Winter, and many
are only playable under specified conditions
[as stated in italics within brackets].
Red Events can be played only by Sparta, and
blue ones by Athens. Green Events (including
Leaders) can be played by either side.
Event effects are detailed in the sidebar.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

Hunger: one besieged City suffers Siege
Attrition on dierolls of 1–2 that season
(Ports must also be blockaded).
Earthquake: Enemy units cannot Move or
Pillage that season (incl. Barbarian recruits).

Atrocity: Enemy (+1 Leader) loses 2 Prestige.

Continuing Events
Continuing Event cards (with black bars)
remain face-up in play until removed.
Leaders: A friendly or enemy Leader is
introduced (only one Leader per side can be
in play: a current Leader must be Ostracized
before being replaced).
Civil War: An unbesieged City loses double
defense for rest of current Year (place marker). Remove card from play next Year End.
Athens Raises Taxes: Athens gains +1 Action/ Turn, but when playing Revolt Events,
Sparta gets an additional Tax Revolt (added
garrison in a qualified Subject City) for each
such card in play. Athens can remove this
card from play in any Year End.
Persian Aid (13.0): Sparta gains +1 Action/Season, but loses 1 Prestige/ Year End
(Tribute). Persian units & Spartan improved
fleets may be Recruited but Revolts become
more difficult. Cannot be removed.
Peace Faction Ascendant: Peace Offers
(14.22) become possible at 5+ Prestige and
only cost –1 Prestige (for both sides).
War Faction Ascendant: cancels Peace
Faction, restores Peace Offers to requiring
10+ Prestige and costing –2 Prestige.
No Quarter: Athens can no longer recruit
elite (E2) fleets. Sparta loses 1 Prestige/
Year End. Cannot be removed.

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War
Most Events affect only the current Player Turn.
Continuing Events (black bars above/below
title) remain in play until removed.
Important: when an Event is played, that
player will have no Actions and can only wage
Siege Attrition combat that Turn (exception:
a Treachery Event allows a limited Assault
against one besieged city — see sidebar, p. 4).

3.11 Leaders

4.0 actions
Cards played with coins upright provide Actions for that Turn equal to the number of coins
shown (this may be increased by Leaders/
Continuing Events in play, see sidebar p4).
Actions cannot be saved for future use.
Note: Players can use Action Markers to show
where and how Actions are spent, see sidebar.

Both sides begin every game with a Leader
card in play (Leaders in play are kept face up
on mapboard). Leaders with a Leader Value
of +1 allow that side 1 extra Action per Player
Turn (except during Events).

Actions can be executed in any order desired
(e.g., built units may move that Turn, or a unit
may move home and then build).

Example: Athens plays a 2-Action card with
Pericles (+1 Leader) in play, yielding 3 Actions that turn.

All units located in a single area (even a single
block) compose a Group.

A side cannot have more than one Leader in
play. Therefore Leaders with 0 Leader Value
must be removed before a better Leader can
replace them. This cannot simply be done
voluntarily: a Leader Ostracized Event must
be played. Initiative order determines the result
when two Leader events for the same side are
played (the 2nd Leader event may be wasted).

3.12 Revolts

Revolts cause a Spartan garrison to appear in
a vacant Athenian Subject City (light blue, see
1.32). For Revolt purposes, the Aeolean Islands
are also considered a Subject Region.
There are 3 types of Revolts:
•	Regional Revolt: A Revolt Event card is
played, specifying a Revolt in a specified
Subject Region [see sidebar].
•	Spreading Revolt: Some Revolt cards
give the Spartan player the option to have
the Revolt occur in a Rebellious Subject
Region (one already containing a Spartancontrolled Subject City, see 1.33) instead of
in the Region specified on the card.
•	Tax Revolt: When Regional or Spreading
Revolt occurs, the Spartan player can place
1 additional garrison in a qualified location
for each Athens Raises Taxes card in play.

3.2 Action Value
All cards also have an Action Value of 1–3
(coins), which allows a player that many Actions during his Player Turn (plus any applicable Leader/Continuing Event bonus).

3.3 Initiative
The cards played determine the order of play
(Initiative) for that Season.
The lower Action Value played goes first.
Events (zero Actions) are always resolved first.
If tied, Sparta goes first.
Leader Value and Continuing Events do not
affect Initiative.

4.1 Group Movement
For 1 Action expended, a player can either
Move a Group or form one (Muster). See 5.0
Movement for details.

4.2 Building
Building Actions can be used to Recruit new
units in their Home Cities/towns, and to build
units in Home Cities one step stronger.
Building cannot occur in besieged Cities (7.2)
or Ports that are besieged & blockaded (8.21).

4.21 Reinforcements

For 1 Action, a unit occupying a Home City can
be increased by 1 cv. Units can build multiple
steps per season if the Actions are available.

4.22 Recruits

For 1 Action, a random new unit can be raised
in a friendly (1.4) Home City or town (1.32).
Secretly select three blocks at random from the
face-down friendly Recruit Pool (2.0). Place
one in a Home City/town and return the others to the Pool (if none of the drawn units are
legally placeable, return all three to the pool,
the Recruit Action is wasted).
Greek units arrive in Home Cities at cadre (1
cv) strength (may build up further that turn).
Barbarian units arrive at full strength in home
towns (only!) and may immediately make a
normal move from there at no Action cost.
Rebel Units. Two units can be recruited in
locations of Opposing Loyalty (if not enemy
occupied). A pro-Spartan Aeolean Ids fleet can
appear in Lesbos or Chios (capturing the City).
A pro-Athenian Macedonia barbarian can appear in any Macedonian town (NOT in Pella).

4.23 Detached Garrisons

For 1 Action, a garrison may be built in an Opposing City occupied by friendly Greek units
(not Barbarians). Garrisons maintain control
of conquered Opposing Cities when occupying
friendly units move elsewhere.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

5

Subject Regions [* = Port]
Euboea

Chalcis 3*, Eretria 2

Chalcidice

Potidea 2*, Torone 2*, Stagira 1

Thrace

Amphipolis 3*, Abdera 1*, Maronea 2

Propontis

Byzantium 3*, Abydos 2*,
Cyzicus 1, Sestos 1

Ionia

Miletus 2*, Ephesus 3*, Cyme 2,
Erythrae 1, Cnidus 1*

Sporades

Samos 3*, Rhodes 2*

Cyclades

Naxos 2*, Andros 1*

Western Islands

Cephallenia 1, Zacinthos 1

Aeolean Islands†

Chios 3*, Lesbos 2*
† Not a Subject Region but can Revolt.

Actions Example

Sparta plays a 3-Actions card.
• they Build a fleet in Corinth from 2 to 3cv.
• they Recruit, drawing 3 units from their
Recruit Pool, placing a Theban (yellow)
fleet cadre in Thebes, and returning the
other 2 units to the Pool.
• a Group of 6 units in Sparta is activated.
Two units move to Corinth, 2 units move to
sea, and 1 unit moves to Messenia.

Action Marker Usage

After Initiative cardplay, players can place
one upright Action marker per available Action on their Action cards.
During Actions, place Action markers on the
map where Actions have been expended with
the relevant edge upright from your POV
(place face-down for Winter Maintenance) .
To end your Actions phase, return Action
Markers to the Action card, face-down.

Group Movement

Group Movement realistically reflects the
slow and completely unreliable communications of the times. Only units actually located
together could cooperate effectively.

Unit Location: Cities & CityStates

Only in cases of Siege is a distinction made
between a City and its CityState regarding
unit location. Otherwise, units in a CityState
are considered to occupy both the Province
and the City within.

6

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

4.3 Pillaging
Pillaging is a special Action in which units besieging an Opposing City devastate its territory
and withdraw into an adjacent area (Loyal Cities cannot be Pillaged). Pillaging immediately
gains Prestige. See 5.5.

4.4 Winter Maintenance
In Winter, any units not moved inside a friendly
City must be Maintained (9.22) at the cost of 1
Action each to avoid being Disbanded (9.23).

5.0 movement
A Group is defined as all friendly units in a single area (no limit). Players can move a Group
or form one (Muster) at a cost of 1 Action.
Group Move. Units of an activated Group can
move to one or more destination area[s] within
their Movement Ranges (or remain where they
are). Units that move along the same route to
a common destination are termed a Formation. Formations can Forced March/Sail (5.3)
and enter enemy-occupied areas (Engage, 5.4).
Muster. Units from different areas move into
a friendly-controlled CityState, observing unit
Movement Ranges. Mustering units cannot
Forced March/Sail (5.3) or Engage (5.4).
A unit can only move once per Player Turn
(exception: 6.4 Retreats).
Units move freely through friendly units, but
generally must stop upon entering an area
containing enemy units (see 5.4, Engaging).

5.1 Land Movement
Land units can move freely on land, except:
• they cannot enter neutral areas (1.31/15.0).
• besieged units (7.4) cannot move by land.
Fleets may occupy coastal land areas only.
They must stop upon entering a land area, so
therefore can move only 1 space on land, following the coastline.
Terrain has no effect on land movement.

5.2 Sea Movement

5.22 DeepSea Crossings

When a fleet Formation (5.0) moves or Retreats
across a DeepSea border (thick blue line), place
a die on each such DeepSea border crossed.
After all Actions (or Retreats) are complete, the
opponent rolls 1 die in each case to see whether
the fleet Formation encounters a Storm:
•	In Spring/Winter: DR 1–3 equals Storm.
•	In Summer/Fall: DR 1–2 equals Storm.
•	In HighSummer: DR 1 equals Storm.
If a Storm is encountered, the owner rolls for
each individual fleet regarding Ship Damage.

5.23 Ship Damage

•	DR 1–3: Gale. Fleet (and any carried land
unit) is eliminated (return to Recruit Pool).
•	DR 4–6: High Seas. Fleet loses 1 cv (any
carried land unit may have to reduce cv to
remain smaller than its carrying fleet).

5.3 Forced March/Sail
Land units and fleets (with carried land units)
can try to move 1 additional area beyond their
normal movement range by Forced March/Sail.
Note: Mustering units cannot attempt to Force
March/Sail to their common destination City.
Upon completing their normal unit movement,
place units attempting a Forced March/Sail on
the border to the additional area desired and
a die within it, announcing “Forced March”
(land) or “Forced Sail” (sea). After all Actions
are done, the owner rolls one die per unit attempting to Forced March/Sail (carried armies
succeed or fail with their carrying fleets).
•	 Regular Units: DR 1-4 Fail; DR 5-6 Succeed
•	Elite Units: DR 1-2 Fail; DR 3-6 Succeed
Important: Units that Succeed can still decline
the extra move (to preserve Group cohesion).

5.4 Engaging
Units entering an area containing unbesieged
enemy units are Engaging and must stop.
The above does not apply during Wintering
Movement (9.21) or the Peace of Nicias (12.0).

Only fleets (and carried land units) may move to
sea. Units moving by sea must stop upon entering a land area. See also Sea Landings (6.6).

Mustering units cannot Engage. Engaging units
are aggressors; opposing units are defenders.
Do not reveal any units until Combat (6.0).

Sea Access: Fleets may enter or leave a coastal
Province via any adjacent Sea. A besieged Port,
however, can only be entered or exited via its
single Offshore Sea (1.3).

5.41 Formation Non-Coordination

5.21 Sea Transport

Separate Formations engaging an enemy Group
fight separate battles. The owner selects which
Formation fights the defenders first. If it loses,
another Formation begins a new Battle with
surviving defenders (Routed defenders recover), etc. Once any attacking Formation wins,
all as-yet unfought Formations join it there.

A fleet can carry one Greek land unit at sea,
provided both units begin and end the turn in
the same area. The cv of a carried land unit
must be less than its carrying fleet (cv may be
voluntarily reduced for Sea Transport).
Barbarians cannot be sea transported.

Groups that divide to move to a destination by
different routes (e.g., fleets by sea and armies
by land) become separate Formations (see 5.0).

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

Disallowed Recruits

Some units (Odrysians, see 2.27; Persians
and Spartan improved [E1] fleets, see 13.2)
can only be Recruited under certain circumstances. If drawn while ineligible, the choice
is restricted to other drawn units.

Rebel Units

Macedonia and the Aeolean Islands can generate both pro-Sparta and pro-Athens units.
The Aeolean Ids. fleets are Greek and can arrive normally as Recruits in Lesbos/Chios (if
no enemy blocks present). The rebel Spartan
fleet captures its arrival City and becomes a
buildable Spartan unit (in its home city).
Initially Athenian allies with independent
fleets, both islands eventually rebelled.
The Macedonia infantry units are Barbarian
and therefore can only arrive in Macedonian
towns, so the city of Pella cannot be captured
by the arrival of the pro-Athenian rebel unit.
Macedonia switched sides between Sparta
and Athens several times, but mostly remained
loyal to Sparta. When both Macedonian
units are in play at once, this represents the
struggle for control between its King Perdiccas and his brother Philip.

Pillaging for Fun and Profit

In classical times it was expensive to maintain
armed forces in the field in winter time. Often
a besieging army would abandon a siege in
Autumn and ravage the enemy countryside
before going home for the Winter.
Watching homes, farms, and orchards being
ruined sometimes tempted fortified troops to
rashly sally out of a city to fight the enemy.

Winter Maintenance

Winter Maintenance is very expensive, but
the only way to maintain a Siege in Winter.
Sieges are three times more effective in
Winter than in other seasons.

Besieged Unit Movement

Besieged units (7.2), being penned up in
their City, cannot move by land. They can,
however, Sortie (8.3) to fight besieging units
in the surrounding Province (no movement
Action required). Fleets (with carried land
units) can exit a besieged Port via its Offshore
Sea (7.4), engaging there if Blockaded (8.21).

Fleets on Land

Fleets on land are considered to have detached
half their men to act as an inland infantry
force while the other half guards their beached
ships, as was commonly done.
Fleets of the time normally spent the night
ashore when possible. A fleet “at sea” thus
represents ships that are patrolling that sea
area by day and beaching at night.

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War
Sorties. Besieged units cannot Coordinate with
friendly outside relieving forces in a single
Battle -- they are separate Formations.

6.2 Combat Rounds

5.42 Siege Assault Coordination

Blocks attack in order of Agility (A/B/C/D etc),
defenders preceding aggressors of equal agility.
Defending “A” blocks attack first, then aggressor “A” blocks, then defending “B” blocks, etc.

In Established Sieges, one moving Formation
can join besiegers in a coordinated Siege Assault (8.1). [The besiegers await the arrival of
the Formation before beginning the assault, so
there is no coordination problem.]

5.5 Pillaging
For 1 Action, players can win Prestige by Pillaging an Opposing CityState where they have
an Established Siege (7.2) from a prior Season.
No friendly units may enter the Pillaged CityState that Player-Turn.
To Pillage, place a Pillaged marker and withdraw all units of the besieging Group (as of the
beginning of the turn) into one or more adjacent
areas that currently contains no enemy units.
Then record +1 Prestige on the Prestige track
[+2 if Athens or Sparta].
A CityState can only be Pillaged once per Year.

6.0 COMBAT
During Combat, Battles and then Sieges are
resolved in those areas occupied by units of
both sides. One Battle or Siege is resolved
before starting another. Engaged units are not
revealed until that Battle is being resolved.
Combat costs no Actions.
Resolve smaller Battles first, according to
the number of units the Acting Player has in
a Battle (count the ‘Primary’ Formation for
multiple battles). The Acting Player chooses the
order of resolving equal-sized battles.
Then the Acting Player resolves any/all friendly
Sieges established in prior Seasons, either by:
• Siege Assault (8.1): a difficult type of battle
against a fortified defender, only possible during Action turns (not during Event turns). OR:
• Siege Attrition (8.2): low intensity ‘starvation’ warfare, resolved without revealing any
units, possible during Event or Action Turns.

6.1 Battle Sequence

Fortifying. In new battles in a CityState, before
units are revealed, the defender can decline
combat and Fortify (7.1) units inside the City
(within its Capacity): turn them upright and add
a garrison. This establishes a Siege (7.2) condition: no further Combat occurs there that turn.
Otherwise, begin Battles by revealing all blocks
(tip forward). The Acting Player is the Aggressor, his opponent is the Defender.
Battles are fought in successive Combat
Rounds until one side either voluntarily Retreats (6.4), Panics (6.34), or is eliminated.

A Combat Round consists of one attack (i.e.,
dieroll, see 6.31) by each block involved.

7

The Diolkos at Corinth: 2 Seacoasts

Corinth is the only Province with two discontinous seacoasts, but a ship skidway there allows
fleets to enter or leave via either coast (fleets
must stop upon reaching land as usual). Its
Offshore Sea is the Gulf of Corinth.

When all blocks in the Battle have attacked,
a Combat Round ends. Repeat until one side
Panics (6.34), Retreats (6.4) or is eliminated.
The victor earns Prestige (14.11).
Retreat Option. Once per Combat Round, at
the time of his first unit attack of that Round,
each player has the option to Retreat (6.4) all
friendly units rather than continue the Battle.

6.3 Combat Resolution

Sea Transport

6.31 Unit Attacks

To effect a Sea Transport, a fleet must begin
the turn in the same area as the land unit to be
carried. The fleet carries the land unit across the
sea and both units end movement in the same
area whether at sea or having reached land.

6.32 Hits

Battle Array

For each individual attacking unit in turn, roll
a number of dice equal to its cv. Apply unit attack results immediately: Hits first, then Routs.
1- power Blocks (A1, B1, etc) score a Hit for
each dieroll of ‘1’. 2-power blocks (A2, B2,
etc) score a Hit on each dieroll of ‘1’ or ‘2’.
3-power blocks score Hits on dierolls of ‘1–3’.
Step Losses. When a unit attacks, apply each
Hit in turn to the currently strongest (largest
cv, owner’s choice among equals) enemy unit.
Hits reduce enemy unit cv by 1 (exception:
Double Defense in Siege Assaults, 8.11).
Units losing their last step are eliminated and
removed to the friendly Recruit Pool.

6.33 Routs

1-Power blocks score a Rout for each dieroll
of “6”. 2-Power blocks score a Rout for every
dieroll of “5–6”. 3-Power blocks score Routs
on dierolls of “4–6”.
When a unit attacks, after applying Hits apply
each Rout to the currently weakest (lowest
cv, owner’s choice among equals) enemy unit
remaining in the battle. Stand Routed blocks
upright (tip back to preserve cv) -- they can
no longer participate in that Battle (neither attack nor take battle losses). Routed units can,
however, still take further losses from Pursuit
(6.34) or Harrying (6.41) in a Panic or Retreat.
Rout Recovery. Routed units suffer no aftereffects once that Battle has ended.
Important: City defenders (8.1) cannot be
Routed (ignore all Rout results).

6.34 Panic

When all units in a Battle have been Routed,
that side Panics and must Retreat ( Pursuit attacks may apply). The victor gains 2 Prestige
for winning a battle by enemy Panic (or by
eliminating all enemy units).
© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

Tipping units forward maintains current cv in
the battle array. When the battle ends, tip units
back upright, again preserving current strength.

Combat Round Example
Spartan cavalry (A1) & hoplite (B2) units
engage Athenian hoplites (C2) & archers (A1).
One Combat Round consists of:
•	Athenian archers (defending A1) attack;
•	Spartan cavalry (aggressor A1) attack;
•	Spartan hoplites (B2) attack;
•	Athenian hoplites (C2) attack.

Attack Example
A 3 cv C2 hoplite unit rolls 3 combat dice:
each 1–2 scores a Hit, and each 5–6 scores a
Rout. A 3–4 is a miss. The dierolls are 1, 2,
& 5, scoring 2 Hits and a Rout. The first Hit
reduces the strongest enemy unit by a cv. The
second Hit may apply to a different enemy unit
if it is now the strongest after the first Hit was
applied. The currently weakest enemy unit is
then Routed.

Eliminated Units
Eliminated units are returned to their respective Recruit Pools (face down).

Pursuit Example
A mixed Spartan force of “A”, “B”, “C” and
“D” units attacks a similar mixed Athenian
force. The Spartans rout all Athenians units
during their “B” unit attacks, causing a Panic.
As they face a slow (“D”) Athenian rearguard,
Spartan “B’s” and “C’s” that have not yet attacked may still attack before the Athenians
Retreat. Apply all Hits usual, but ignore Routs.

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

8

Pursuit. In Panics, the least Agile Panicked
unit(s) become(s) the enemy Rearguard. All
unrouted victorious units that are more Agile
than the enemy Rearguard and that that have
not yet attacked during that Combat Round
can still attack in Pursuit. Apply Pursuit Hits
normally but ignore any Rout results.
All Panicked units must then Retreat (6.4). The
victor then records his gain of 2 Prestige for
winning a Battle by Panic.

6.4 Retreats
Once per Combat Round, players have the option to end the Battle and Retreat all friendly
units. This option can only be exercised at
the time when the first friendly unit attack of
that Combat Round would occur. Retreating
without Panic cedes 1 Prestige to the enemy.
Skirmishes (14.11). No Prestige is lost for
Retreating from a land (not sea) battle before
suffering any Hits or Routs (termed ‘Retiring’).
•	All units of the Retreating Group must
Retreat into an adjacent area (but not necessarily all into the same area).
•	Units can only Retreat into areas into
which they can move (land units cannot
retreat to sea without a carrying fleet).
•	Aggressors can only Retreat back into the
area from where they engaged.
•	Defenders can Retreat into any adjacent
areas except those from where they were
engaged and those that are enemy-controlled.
•	Fortifying: Units defending a controlled
CityState can Retreat into the City and
Fortify (7.1) if desired.
•	Sieges: Besiegers making Siege Assaults
(8.12) can only Retreat back into the surrounding Province. Sortiers (8.3) can only
Retreat back into the besieged City. Units
engaging besiegers from outside a City cannot Retreat into the City.
•	Besieged City Defenders cannot Retreat,
except fleets & carried land units from
Ports into the Offshore Sea (if not enemyoccupied).
•	Fleets Trapped on Land: Fleets on land
defending against a Sea Landing (6.6)
cannot Retreat except into a Port of that
Province.
•	Units unable to Retreat must remain in the
Battle. If Panicked they are eliminated.
•	Routed units can Retreat normally.
•	Garrisons can never Retreat.
•	Retreated units cannot fight again that turn.

6.41 Cavalry Harrying in Retreats
When a Retreat is declared, all unrouted Cavalry units of both sides get a bonus Harrying
attack on enemy units before the Retreat is executed. Apply Hits normally, but ignore Routs.

(In a Panic, both Pursuit and Harrying apply.)
Harrying has NO Prestige effects.

6.5 Sea Battles
Sea Battles differ only in that:
•	Only fleets can attack or take losses in Sea
Battles (use E and F combat ratings in sea
combat, E units going 1st).
•	In Sea Battles, carried land units can neither attack nor absorb Hits/Routs, but must
reduce cv as needed to remain weaker than
their carrying fleet.
•	Narrows. Fleets engaging across a narrows (double sea border) cannot attack in
the 1st Combat Round (in effect, defending
fleets get a “free” initial shot).

6.6 Sea Landings
Units engaging from sea to land (whether fleets
or carried land units) cannot attack in the first
Combat Round (in effect defending units get
a “free” attack).
Important: fleets on land defending against an
enemy Sea Landing cannot Retreat!

7.0 SIEGE
7.1 Fortifying
Some or all units defending a CityState can
decline combat before units are revealed and
Fortify inside the City. Turn these units flat,
face-down, tipped back to preserve cv.
Important: City Capacity (double City Value)
is the maximum number of units able to fortify
there (remember: garrisons do NOT count).
Fleets can only fortify in Ports, not inland Cities. Units unable to fortify must fight.
Declining combat and immediately Fortifying
does not constitute a Retreat or a lost Battle.
CityState defenders that fight can still Retreat
into the City (and Fortify) later on during the
Battle, though this would constitute a Retreat
with resulting lost Prestige.

7.2 Establishing Siege
A state of Siege is established when City defenders have Fortified and enemy forces have
sole occupation of the surrounding Province.
In the Combat phase, add a City Garrison (7.3)
to the face-down defenders. This indicates the
Siege is now Established. No Siege Combat
occurs in the initial Player-Turn of siege, but in
subsequent Turns the besieged City is subject
to Siege Combat (8.0) and Pillaging (5.5).
Siege is the only situation where both
sides can occupy the same area (always a
CityState) without a mandatory Battle.
The City Defenders are termed “besieged”, and
the enemy units in the surrounding Province are
termed “besieging” forces.
© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

Retreats
Units can never Retreat into enemy-controlled
areas (including vacant enemy CityStates) or
into enemy-occupied areas (including Battles).

Cavalry Raids
In Retreats, unrouted Cavalry gets a free Harrying attack against enemy forces.
Cavalry can engage enemy forces, Retreat
(14.11) immediately, and still get a Harrying attack. Unless enemy cavalry or archers
(‘A’ units) are present, there is no risk to the
engaging cavalry (no enemy unit will be able
to attack it before it Retreats).
The phrase “Cavalry Raid” can be used as
shorthand for the sequence:
•	Cavalry Engages [reveal units]
•	[Enemy “A” units attack, if present]
•	Cavalry Retreats
•	Cavalry Harrying [enemy first if present]
In effect, unless enemy “A” units are present,
Cavalry takes a free shot at the enemy, scoring
Hits only (not Routs) with no Prestige effect.
If enemy “A” units are present, however, they
may Hit or Rout the raiding Cavalry before it
can Retire, turning the Skirmish (no Prestige
loss, see 14.11) into a Retreat (1 Prestige lost)
or a Panic (2 Prestige lost).
If a Cavalry Raid is made by Sortie (8.3) out of
a besieged City, no Action need be expended!

Offshore / Adjacent Seas
A Port has 1 Offshore Sea (into which its
symbol protrudes). A besieged Port still has
access in or out via that sea (only).
Units occupying an entire coastal Province (as
opposed to being besieged in its Port) have
access to all adjacent seas.

Walled Cities and Sieges
Walled cities of the day proved very difficult
to take by assault. More often, they fell to attrition or some kind of treachery. Siege engines
were in their infancy and catapults had not yet
been invented.
Siege warfare involved circumvallation, a
process of building a containing wall around
a fortified city. For port cities, a besieging
fleet was also necessary to complete the siege.
Sieges were often successful but rarely
quickly. Cities often resisted siege for a year
or two, but could not hold out indefinitely. But
Siege has its own dangers and consumes time
and resources.

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

7.3 City Garrisons

Assaulting units take full losses.

City Garrisons appear (at no cost) in friendly
Loyal Cities when Siege is Established (remove
them if the Siege is lifted).

8.12 Siege Assault Retreats

Permanent Garrisons may also be built (4.23)
in captured Opposing Cities to maintain control
if friendly units leave. Permanent Garrisons
are NOT removed when a Siege is lifted.
Garrisons are immobile 1 cv blocks that defend
Cities only: they cannot move or defend outside
their City (e.g., vs. Sea Landings or to impede
enemy movement through the CityState). They
DO NOT count against City Capacity (see 7.1).

City Assaulters can only Retreat back into the
surrounding Province, re-assuming besieging
(upright) status.
Besieged land units cannot Retreat (except by
sea). Besieged fleets can Retreat from a Port
into its Offshore Sea (unless enemy-occupied
see 6.4), each Transporting (5.21) a friendly
land unit if desired.

8.13 Capitulation

As for all City defenders, garrisons have A2
combat ratings, double defense, and cannot be
Routed (see 8.1). They must be the last block
eliminated from the City.

When a Siege Assault is declared, before all
units involved are first revealed, the defender
has the immediate option to Capitulate, conceding defeat to save Prestige. All defending units
are eliminated (remove to the Recruit Pool), but
assaulting units are undamaged.

Only 1 garrison is allowed per City. They are
not limited to blocks provided.

Capitulation loses only 1 Prestige (where 2
Prestige would be lost to a successful Assault).

7.4 Besieged Unit Movement

8.2 Siege Attrition

Units besieged in a City cannot move. They
can, however, Sortie [8.3] to engage besieging
units outside the City walls (no move required).
Fleets besieged in a Port can move into its
Offshore Sea (carrying land units), precipitating a Sea Battle there if opposed or continuing
movement if not.

8.0 SIEGE COMBAT
During Siege Combat, the Acting Player can
wage either Siege Assault or Siege Attrition
against each besieged City where Siege has
been established in a previous Season. He may
also Sortie (8.3)to engage enemy besiegers.

8.1 Siege Assault
Siege Assaults cannot occur during Event turns,
only during Action turns.
Exception: The Treachery Event (see sidebar,
p. 4) allows one limited Treachery Assault.
When a Player declares a Siege Assault, the defender has the immediate option to Capitulate
(8.13), before units are revealed. Capitulation
concedes defeat to save Prestige.
If no Capitulation occurs, Assaults are fought
like normal Battles, except all City defenders
(including garrisons):
•	assume an A2 combat rating,
•	have Double Defense (below), and
•	cannot be Routed.

8.11 Double Defense

In Siege Assaults, City defenders only lose
one cv for every 2 Hits received. Once a block
is assigned a Hit (i.e., a half-step loss) it must
take the next Hit for a full step loss. However,
half-step losses left over at the end of a Combat
Round are lost.

Siege Attrition is possible during either Event
turns or Action Turns. No units of either side
are revealed.
To wage Siege Attrition, the besieger rolls 1
die per besieged block (including garrisons).
•	In Spring/ Summer/ HighSummer/ Fall,
each “1” scores a Hit on besieged forces.
•	In Winter, each “1, 2 or 3” scores a Hit,
but besiegers must be Maintained (9.22)
•	Each Hit is applied to the currently strongest (cv) besieged block (owner’s choice of
equals). Garrisons are eliminated last.
•	The besieger suffers no losses.

8.21 Blockade

A Port is Blockaded if enemy fleets occupy
its Offshore Sea, but Athens is considered
to Blockade all unoccupied Offshore Seas.
Siege Attrition cannot be waged against a Port
unless it has been blockaded as well as besieged
since a prior Season. Building cannot occur
in a Port that is both besieged and blockaded.

8.22 Black Sea Grain

The city of Athens is considered to be Blockaded if Spartan fleets occupy any of: the Hellespont, the Sea of Marmara OR the Saronic
Gulf (note all 3 have a blue supply symbol).
When blockaded and besieged as above, Athens
is always subject to Winter rates (cv loss on DR
1–3) for Siege Attrition.

8.3 Sorties
During Siege Combat of an Action Turn,
friendly besieged units can engage besiegers in
a land battle outside the City walls (neither side
has double defense). Garrisons cannot Sortie.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

9

Fortifying
Fortifying is the withdrawal of defending
units into a walled city, ceding control of
the surrounding countryside to the besieger.

City Control
Upright units occupying a CityState (with no
opposing units present) control it.
If a CityState is vacant, it is controlled according to its loyalty. Thus, the conqueror
of an opposing City must maintain a unit or
garrison there (at the end of each Action or
Combat phase) or the City will revert back
to its original owner!
In a Siege situation, units of both sides are
present.
•	Besieged [fortified] units (lying flat and
face down) control the City.
•	Besieging units (upright) control the
surrounding Province (and friendly units
can move through it without stopping).

City Garrisons
City Garrisons are always present in loyal
Cities, just not represented until needed.

Double Defense
Defending units only lose one step for every
two hits scored by attacking units. At the end
of a Combat Round, accumulated half-step
losses are canceled.
To register a half-step loss on a block with
Double Defense, rotate it 45 degrees counterclockwise. If a full step loss (90 degree rotation) is not achieved in that Combat Round,
return it to its former cv.

Capitulation: Honors of War
In cases where a City voluntarily surrendered
to a besieging force before blood was shed,
lenient terms were usually granted.

The Athenian Grain Supply
The Long Walls enclosing Athens and its
harbors Piraeus and Phalerum made Athens
practically invulnerable to siege. However,
with its huge population (hundreds of thousands, when all other Greek cities were tens
of thousands), Athens was utterly unable to
feed itself if denied food imports. The naval
supremacy guaranteeing the delivery of its
Black Sea grain supply was thus critical.
Historically, Athens was finally defeated
when the Spartan navy gained control of the
Propontis and cut off its food supply.

10

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

Sorties must be declared at the start of the
Combat phase (turn Sortiers upright). They
consume no Actions (as no “movement” occurs) but cannot occur during Event turns.
Sorties cannot Coordinate (5.42) with outside
Groups/Formations in a combined Battle
against besiegers.
Sortie Retreats. Sortiers can only Retreat back
into the besieged City. Defeated besieging forces Retreat normally (6.4) from Sortie battles.

9.0 WINTER
Winter season (the last card played each GameYear) follows a different play sequence with
several special rules in effect.
Initiative cardplay is as usual.
Then, Winter play sequence is as follows:
•	 Player 1 does Winter Actions, then Player 2.
•	Player 1 does SiegeBreaking Combat (if
any), followed by Player 2.
•	Player 1 does Winter Siege Combat, followed by Player 2.
OverWintering. Units can survive Winter
only if they are inside a friendly-controlled
City (including captured Opposing Cities) or
if they are Maintained (9.22). Otherwise they
must Disband (9.24).
Note: City Capacity (1.3) must be observed
when OverWintering. Fleets can OverWinter in
a coastal inland (non-Port) City to avoid Maintenance, even though they cannot fortify there.

9.1 Winter Initiative
Play an Action card only (Events cannot be
played in Winter). The player with fewer Actions is the 1st Player (Sparta wins ties).

9.2 Winter Actions
The 1st Player executes his Actions (Wintering
Movement, Building, Winter Maintenance and
Disbanding) in any order. Then the 2nd Player
does his Actions, before any combat occurs.

9.21 Wintering Movement

In Winter, only Group Moves into controlled
Cities can be made. Neither Musters nor Pillaging is allowed, though fleets can carry land
units us usual. Wintering Movement normally
costs one Action per Group Move, but some
moves are free.
Wintering units pass freely through any enemy
units encountered (with no effect on either
group), except those blockading/besieging their
destination City (must stop).
Wintering forces can only challenge enemy
besieging/blockading forces when Homing
(9.212). Otherwise, Wintering units may not
try to enter enemy-blockaded Ports by sea or

enemy-besieged Cities by land.
In Wintering Movement, all Forced Marches/
Sails automatically succeed. DeepSea Crossings are rolled for as usual.

CityState Occupants
Units in unbesieged CityStates are considered
to occupy the City or the Province, as desired.

9.211 Quartering (free)
Units NOT currently “inside” a controlled City
(i.e., within its City Capacity) may make Wintering Movement into an adjacent controlled
City (one area distant) at NO COST in Actions.

Friendly Cities & Home Cities

9.212 Homing (free)
Units NOT inside a controlled Home City may
make Wintering Movement to a controlled
Home City at NO COST in Actions (using
their full Movement Range, plus an automatic
Forced March/Sail).

Home Cities are those that are the same color
coding as the unit(s) in question. Units can
make free Homing moves to friendly controlled Home Cities in Winter.

If the destination Home City is Besieged or its
Offshore Sea is Blockaded (8.21) by the enemy,
a Homing Battle (9.31) might be precipitated
there. This is the ONLY case where engaging
in Winter is allowed.
9.213 Displacement
If Wintering Movement overloads a City’s
Capacity, units there that have not already
made a Wintering Move may become eligible
to make a free Quartering or Homing move
(excess units are no longer “inside” the City
and hence may qualify).
Important: City Capacity is double the City
Value: units in excess of this (owner’s choice;
garrisons do not count) are outside the City
for all purposes.
9.214 Group Movement (1 Action)
Units that cannot reach Winter shelter by
Quartering or Homing can also use a normal
Group Move Action to reach a controlled City.
No Musters or engaging are allowed, but all
Forced Marches/Sails automatically succeed.

9.22 Winter Maintenance

Units not within friendly-controlled Cities
(this necessarily includes all besiegers) can
OverWinter only if Maintained at a cost of 1
Action per unit (otherwise they must Disband,
9.24). Place an Action marker face-down near
each unit being Maintained: the blank side up
indicates a Winter Maintenance Action.

9.23 Winter Building

Winter Actions may be spent on Recruiting new
units or adding cv to existing units in Home
Cities only.
Note: Barbarians recruited in Winter must
immediately disband (9.24).

9.24 Winter Disbanding

All Barbarians on the map must now Disband
regardless of location: remove them to the
friendly Recruit Pool.
Note: Barbarians that capture Cities will have
to disband before collecting any Tribute.
© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

Friendly Cities are those that are friendly
controlled, regardless of original Loyalty.
Units can Quarter in adjacent friendly Cities
in Winter.

Wintering Movement
At the end of the campaigning season, armies
of the time normally returned home for Winter.
Keeping forces in the field over Winter was
very costly and unpopular. Since they were
concerned with returning home, not fighting,
units are allowed to pass through enemy forces
without combat.
Since it costs resources to keep units in the
field over Winter (rather than the reverse), it
makes no sense to charge an Action cost to
return units Home for Winter.
NOTE: In Winter, engagements ONLY occur
when Homing units challenge enemy forces
besieging/blockading their destination Home
City. This means that, in Winter, enemy Sieges
and Blockades can only be challenged by Sortie or by units returning to their Home Cities.

Quartering Example
Entering Winter, an Athenian fleet remains
in the Hellespont, but Athens does not wish
to maintain this unit at sea. A Homing Move
to Athens would involve two dangerous
DeepSea Crossings. It is, however, adjacent
to the friendly Subject City of Abydos, and
therefore makes a free Quartering move there
to OverWinter.

Displacement Example
Entering Winter, an Athenian land unit and
fleet are besieging Leucas but cannot be
maintained. Too far from Athens for a Homing Move, they make Quartering moves into
friendly City Stratus. However, there is already
1 unit there, so its City Capacity (double the
City Value of 1 = 2) is now exceeded.
The original Stratus unit can now be considered “outside” the City due to inadequate
Capacity, becoming eligible to make a Wintering move. It therefore makes a free Quartering
move into Naupactis.

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

11

All Greek units neither inside a friendly City
nor being Maintained must also Disband.

9.5 Year End

OverWintering Fleets

Exception: Unmaintained Homing units engaged in potential Homing Battles (9.31) do not
disband yet. Units defeated in a Homing Battle
(and unable to OverWinter) must then disband.

9.51 Collect Tribute

Both players collect Prestige equal to the total
Value of all Opposing Cities they control (do
not count Loyal Cities). Adjust the Prestige
marker to conform to the new totals.

Fleets can OverWinter in an [unbesieged]
friendly CityState containing an inland City,
despite the fact that they cannot Fortify there
(7.1).

9.3 Winter SiegeBreaking Combat
In Winter, both players do Actions before any
combat occurs. This allows all Wintering units
to avoid Battle (avoiding Retreat and Prestige
loss) and ensures that only Maintained units
can resist enemy forces. Winter Siegebreaking
Combat allows both players a chance to break
Sieges before heavy Winter Attrition can occur.
In this phase, both players in turn (initiative
order) can initiate Homing Battles and Sorties
against enemy Sieges that remain if force after
Winter Actions (note that only Maintained
enemy units can remain on Siege at this point).

9.31 Homing Battles

Homing units trying to reach a besieged Home
City by land precipitate a Homing Battle in the
surrounding Province.
Note: Homing fleets could reach a besieged but
unblockaded Port without fighting by entering
it via its Offshore Sea.
Homing fleets trying to reach a friendly Port via
its blockaded Offshore Sea precipitate a Homing Battle there. If victorious (or unchallenged
after enemy Winter Actions are executed) they
may immediately move into the City.
Homing Battles are resolved normally (usual
Prestige effects apply). Formation Non-Coordination rules (5.41) still apply when more
than one Group is engaging by Homing move.
Homing units unsuccessful in Homing Battles
must Disband.

9.32 Winter Sorties

Similarly, besieged units can now Sortie and
attack enemy besiegers in the surrounding
Province (no Action required to Sortie).

9.4 Winter Siege Combat

Important: In the 415 and 413 games, after
War Resumes (12.11), each player’s Tribute is
reduced by HALF (rounded down).

9.52 Victory Check
Prestige of 15+ wins immediately (14.21).
A Player with Prestige of 10 or more can make
a Peace Offer (14.22).
If the Peace Faction Ascendant continuing
Event is in play, a Player with Prestige greater
than 5 can make a Peace Offer.

9.53 Advance Year

Remove Pillaged/Civil War markers and undesired Continuing Events (when allowable).
Advance the Year marker.

9.54 Reshuffle Unused Cards

Collect and shuffle all cards except Continuing
Events / Leaders remaining in play.

10.0 NEW YEAR
Begin each Game Year as follows.

10.1 Year Start
Deal 6 cards to each player.
Both players secretly commit one card, face
down, then reveal them simultaneously.

10.2 New Year Events
Events are resolved first as usual.
Revolts and Helot Uprisings cannot be played
as NewYear Events (errata: this prohibition is
not noted on the Helot Uprising cards).
Note: Since there is no NewYear combat, some
Events like Treachery, etc. have no value. When
2 Leaders for the same side are played, see 3.11.

In initiative order, each player in turn does
Siege Combat (Assault or Attrition) wherever
he has Established Sieges in a prior Season.

10.3 New Year Sacrifices

However, Winter Siege Attrition scores Hits on
dierolls of 1–3 (triple effectiveness).

Actions played at NewYear are Sacrificed to
an Olympian: place a spare garrison in the selected Olympian box. The Action Value of the
Sacrifice is immaterial except in determining
who Sacrifices first (3.3).

Note that no unit can initiate combat in both
Winter Combat phases: the first is composed of
‘defensive’ siegebreaking combat initiated by
the besieged party; the second is composed of
‘offensive’ siege combat initiated by besiegers.

No Actions can take place during NewYear.

Sacrifices entitle a player to Appeal to that
Olympian (see 11.0) later in the game for
redress of some unfortunate game occurrence.
Each player can accumulate 1 Sacrifice to each
Olympian, but no more. Sacrifices carry over
from Year to Year until used.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

Note: If this occurs and the CityState is attacked in the Spring, the fleet will be outside
the fortifications and must fight a land battle
(Retreating if it loses), as it cannot fortify in
an inland City.
Fleets can also make Wintering moves into a
besieged Port, entering via its Offshore Sea. If
enemy fleets are present in a home Offshore
Sea, a Homing Battle results (these only occur
when trying to break a Siege or Blockade to
enter a Home City). If enemy fleets are present in the Offshore Sea of a friendly Port that
is NOT a Home City, Wintering units CANNOT challenge the blockading enemy fleets
to Winter there.
Fleets can also make Wintering moves into an
unbesieged Port without entering its Offshore
Sea, by landing there from a different adjacent
sea.

Homing Example
Entering Winter, two Athenian fleets are besieging Samos, which has revolted. Not wishing to
maintain these units over Winter, Athens makes
free Homing Moves to return them to Athens.
They move right through the Paros Sea despite
the presence of a maintained Spartan fleet there

Homing Battles
Homing Battles ONLY occur when Homing
units attempt to break a Siege or Blockade of
their target Home City. Otherwise the presence
of enemy units is ignored as units are presumed
to be only concerned with returning home or
maintaining sieges.

Homing Battle Example

In the Homing Example above, the Spartans
also have 2 maintained fleets in the Saronic
Gulf, the Offshore Sea of target Home City
Athens, PLUS one maintained Spartan unit is
besieging Athens on land.
Instead of engaging the 2 enemy fleets in the
Saronic Gulf, the Athenian fleets opt to try to
reach home by breaking the landward Siege,
landing in Athens from the Andros Sea and
precipitating a Homing Battle there against the
besieging unit.
This is a Sea Landing, and the 3cv Spartan B2
besieger rolls 5,6 scoring 2 Routs. Both Athenian fleets must Retreat and disband, having
failed to reach Home. They might have had
better luck attempting to reach home via the
Saronic Gulf.

12

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

11.0 OLYMPIANS
A player with a Sacrifice to an Olympian can
Appeal to that Olympian for rectification of a
specific type of unsatisfactory random result
(dieroll, recruit draw, etc.) made by himself or
by the opponent.
Appeals must be made immediately after the
random result, before play proceeds. They
force the original player to re-roll or re-draw, as
applicable, which then becomes the operative
result. This expends the Sacrifice (remove the
relevant block). Only one Appeal can be made
to each Olympian per Player Turn.
Appeals enable the following:
Zeus: Discard & re-draw all 6 cards of a NewYear card draw (no re-shuffle).
Apollo: Return all 3 Recruit blocks drawn
and re-draw 3 blocks, OR have the opponent
return a placed Recruit to his Pool and re-draw
3 blocks.
Ares: Re-roll the most recent unit attack and
any desired subsequent attacks by the currently
attacking friendly OR enemy agility class.
Example: if friendly “C” units are attacking,
the latest and all subsequent friendly “C” unit
attacks may be re-rolled if desired.
Demeter: Re-roll one entire friendly or enemy
Siege Attrition dieroll (1d6/ defending block).
Poseidon: Re-roll 1 Storm dieroll.
Hermes: Re-roll all failed Forced March/Sail
dierolls for one Formation of units that were
Force Marching/ Sailing together.
Hera: Immediately re-do (overrule) the result
of an opponent’s Appeal to another Olympian.

12.0 PEACE OF
NICIAS
The 415 and Sicily Scenarios begin with the
following special rules in effect:
1. Revolt, Uprising, Persian Aid and Athens
Raises Taxes Events cannot be played. Rebel
units (4.22) cannot be recruited.
2. Within GREECE (only):
a) All units must remain within home territory when on land (e.g., they cannot enter
captured Opposing Cities), and cannot
engage/besiege enemy forces (including
in Home Cities that have been lost). City
Capacity is triple the City Value.
b) Units can travel freely at sea (passing
through enemy units without stopping
or combat), but must end movement
within home territory or its Offshore Seas.
Forced Marches/Sails always succeed.

Sicily Campaign Prep: Pro-Athenian
units may also end movement in Corcyran
home territory or its Offshore Sea.
3. Public Works: Athens loses 1 Action per Turn
unless at least 6 non-Sicilian pro-Athenian
units (termed “Expeditionaries”) are in Sicily
at the beginning of its Player Turn.

12.1 War Resumes
In the 415 Scenario either player can break the
Peace (canceling the above Peace of Nicias
rules) by so declaring at the beginning of his
Player Turn. This incurs a Prestige loss according to the current Year:
Year

415

414

413

412

411 410+

Sparta

–5

–4

–3

–2

–1

0

Athens

–10

–8

–6

–4

–2

0

12.11 Reduced Tribute

Once War Resumes, only HALF Prestige is
gained from Tribute each NewYear: total Tribute, then halve (round down).

12.12 Decelea

When War Resumes, Thebes’ City Capacity
remains at 12 (triple City Value).

12.13 New Spartan Recruits

When War Resumes, add Spartan units #41–46
(Persians and E1 improved fleets with boxed
yellow IDs) to its Recruit Pool.

13.0 PERSIAN AID
13.1 Persian Gold
For each Persian Aid card in play (415+):
•	Sparta +1 Action/Season.
•	Sparta –1 Prestige/NewYear.

The Olympians
Zeus: Since Sacrifices occur after cards are
dealt, players cannot Sacrifice to Zeus to throw
in their cards from the current New Year’s card
draw. The Sacrifice to Zeus must have been
made in a previous Year.
Hera: Only Hera can re-do an Appeal to
an Olympian: A second Appeal to the same
Olympian cannot be made in a Player-Turn.

“Home Territory”
Home territory means all cities/towns of the
same color as the unit.

Persian Aid & Revolts
ONE Persian Aid card in play: Spartan Revolt
cards can be used for Regional Revolts (as per
the card) but NOT for Spreading Revolts in
another Subject Region containing a Spartancontrolled City. One bonus Tax Revolt can still
occur per Athens Raises Taxes card in play.
TWO Persian Aid cards in play: Spartan Revolt cards cannot be used either for Regional
Revolts (as per the card) NOR for Spreading
Revolts. Tax Revolts are still possible: 1 bonus
Tax Revolt occurs per Athens Raises Taxes
card in play.
THREE Persian Aid cards in play: No Revolts
of any kind are possible (Athens can raise taxes
with impunity).

Decelea
When war resumed, the Spartans began the
practice of overwintering the Peloponnesian
army in a fort at Decelea, in Boeotia near the
Attican border, instead of returning home each
winter and remustering in the Spring.

13.2 Persian Intervention
When Persian Aid cards are in play:
•	Persian units can be Recruited, and units
can enter Persia (Lydia and Phrygia).
•	Spartan Improved Fleets (E1) can be Recruited (these cannot be Recruited if drawn
unless Persian Aid is in play).

13.3 Reduced Revolts
1 Persian Aid card in play nullifies any Spreading Revolts (3.12). Regional and Tax Revolts
are still possible if a Revolt card is played.
A 2nd Persian Aid card in play also nullifies
any Regional Revolts. Tax Revolts remain possible when a Revolt Event is played if Athens
Raises Taxes is in play.
3 Persian Aid cards in play nullify all Revolts.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

The Periclean Age
The Peloponnesian War took place during (and effectively destroyed) the Greek
Classical Age. The Classical Greeks made
breathtaking advances in science, mathematics, philosophy, drama, sculpture, and
government. Thucydides’ history of the
Peloponnesian War, for example, is strikingly modern in its attitude of objective
observation and studied rational analysis.
But the Greek Golden Age, like all of ancient
Greek history, was marked by ceaseless
internecine warfare born of greed, pride
and ambition. Even the great democracy of
Athens waged war to oppress and enslave
its weaker neighbors. Ironically, reactionary
and militarized Sparta assumed the role of
liberator of the Greeks.

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

14.0 VICTORY

15.0 SCENARIOS

14.1 Prestige

15.1 The 431 Campaign

Victory is won with Prestige, as recorded on the
Prestige Track. Players gain Prestige by winning Battles, Pillaging and collecting Tribute.

Athenian imperialism finally provoked a Spartan-Corinthian ultimatum in 431 BC. Athenian
leader Pericles argued that war was less damaging than submitting to Spartan demands, and
championed a passive war of attrition, relying
on Athens’ Long Walls and naval supremacy to
thwart and eventually discourage its enemies.

Prestige usually begins at 0 (see Scenario descriptions). Move the Prestige Marker along
the track to record Prestige changes. (Example:
Athens gains 2 Prestige: move the block 2
spaces towards Athens Wins.)

14.11 Winning Battles

Triumph: Players gain 2 Prestige when all
enemy units in a battle are Panicked or eliminated (including when a City is carried by Siege
Assault, but see 8.13 Capitulation).
Trophy: Players gain 1 Prestige if the enemy
Retreats from Combat without being Panicked
(6.34), or when a City is captured by Siege Attrition or Capitulation (8.13).
Skirmish: In land battles, no Prestige is gained
when if the enemy “Retires” (Retreats before
suffering any step loss or Rout). [In Sea Battles,
Retreating always loses 1 Prestige.]

14.12 Pillaging

Players gain 1 Prestige for Pillaging (5.5) an
Opposing CityState (2 Prestige for Pillaging
Athens or Sparta).

14.13 Tribute

Collected at Year End. See 9.51.

14.2 Winning the Game
14.21 Enemy Surrender

A player with 15 or more Prestige at Victory
Check wins a Decisive Victory.

14.22 Negotiated Peace

A player with 10+ Prestige can make a Peace
Offer. To do so, he reduces his Prestige by 2
and each player rolls ONE die. If the 2 dice total
is LESS THAN the resulting Prestige level, he
wins the game by a Negotiated Peace. If not,
play continues.

This strategy was quickly undermined by a devastating plague that swept away much of Athens
and Pericles himself. Ten years of inconclusive
war was finally ended by the Peace of Nicias.
Duration: 431–422 BC (10 Years).
Playing Time: 4 hours.
Neutrals: Argos, Achaea, Persia, Sicily.
Units: Both sides use units #1–40.
Cards: Use Gold & Silver bordered cards only
(cards #1–44).

Setup: Athens

Units: See the 431 Setup card—Athens. Deploy
the units shown in the specified CityState (4
units are besieging Potidea) or anywhere within
a specified Nation. Units #1–40 not shown go in
the friendly Recruit Pool, face down.
Note: when a Setup card specifies a location that
is both Nation and a CityState (e.g., Corinth),
the Nation is indicated.
Leader: Pericles (+1). Remove card from deck,
place face-up in play.

Setup: Sparta

Units: See the 431 Setup card—Sparta. Deploy
the units shown in the specified CityState (2
units + garrison besieged in Potidea) or anywhere within a specified Nation. Units #1–40
not shown go in the friendly Recruit Pool, face
down.
Captured City: Potidea [besieged].
Leader: Archidamos (0). Remove card from
deck, place face-up in play.

If Peace Faction Ascendant is in play, Peace
Offers can be made with 5+ Prestige and cost
only 1 Prestige to make.

Game Start

14.23 Exhaustion

431 Special Rules

At the end of a Campaign, evaluate Victory as
given below.

14.24 Victory Level
Major Victory: 10+ Prestige
Minor Victory: 5+ Prestige
Draw: 0–4 Prestige

Place starting forces/Leaders. Shuffle remaining
cards, deal 6 to each player.
1.	The Odrysia A3 cavalry unit (#37/white
namebox) can only be recruited when Athens
has no Leader in play.
2.	Civil War is not playable against Athens
while Pericles is Leader.
3.	Pericles can only be Ostracized if Athens
was Pillaged in the previous Season. Pericles
dies (remove from deck) on the 2nd occurrence of Plague in Athens (no further Plague
can occur).
© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

13

Prelude: 490-432 BC

After the famous Greek victories over Persia
in 490-480, Athens formed the Delian League
to ensure Greek naval control of the Aegean,
but this evolved from a voluntary alliance into
an empire.
In 433, Corinth (commercial rival to Athens
and longtime member of the opposing Spartan
League) clashed with its colony Corcyra over
the city of Epidamnus. Feeling the winds of war,
Athens backed fellow naval power Corcyra,
earning the undying enmity of Corinth.
In revenge Corinth fomented a revolt from Athens in its former colony Potidea, then lobbied
the Spartan League to send aid against the resulting Athenian siege, arguing that Athens had
grown too powerful and threatened to dominate
all Greece. Sparta reluctantly supported its main
ally and war began.

The Archidamian War: 431-422 BC

So-called because King Archidamos commanded the Spartan League, this campaign
began with Potidea in revolt and already under
Athenian siege. Thebes opened the proceedings with a failed sneak attack on longtime foe
Platea. Mutual invasion and pillage followed,
Sparta overland into Attica, and Athens by
sea into enemy territory. In 430 a devastating
plague struck Athens, eventually carrying away
its great leader Pericles along with a third of its
population. Lesbos revolted but fell to Athenian
siege along with Potidea, while Platea fell to
Spartan siege.
The war spread to central Greece, with campaigns in Acarnania, Leucas, Zacinthos, Ambracia, and Boeotia. Civil War broke out twice
in Corcyra, but with Athenian naval support the
democrats prevailed. En route there, an Athenian fleet was blown ashore at Pylos, a natural
harbor 75 miles from Sparta, and the decision
was made to fortify the place. A Spartan land/
sea attack failed and Spartans isolated on the
island of Sphacteria in the harbor mouth were
defeated and captured.
Meanwhile, Brasidus, Sparta’s most aggressive commander, took a Spartan army north to
Chalcidice, fomenting revolt there and in Amphipolis. Cleon, Athen’s most aggressive leader,
replied by reconquering several revolting cities.
The two met at Amphipolis, where Athens was
routed but both leaders died in the battle.
War weariness, the death of the two most bellicose war leaders, and the impending end of
Sparta’s 30-year truce with its arch-enemy
Argos led to a negotiated peace in 422 BC.

14

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

15.2 The Sicily Campaign

15.3 The 413 Campaign

The Peace of Nicias unraveled within a few
years. With Sparta’s ‘alliance’ to Athens and
the end of its 30 year truce with Argos, the
Spartan League dissolved into a melee of
CityStates jockeying for position. Elis and
Mantinea joined with Argos, fought Sparta and
lost. Corinth and Thebes never accepted a status
quo that left Athens unbowed. Sparta’s noncompliance with the peace terms brought the
anti-Spartan policies of Alcibiades into prominence in Athens. Finally Athens succumbed to
temptation and sent a major expedition against
Syracuse, a faraway neutral city almost as large
and rich as itself. Disaster ensued.

Athens had just lost half its fleet and a third
of its army in the disastrous misadventure in
Sicily. Sparta saw its chance, reassembled
the League in its original form and rekindled
the war. Aided by Persian gold and revolts in
Rhodes, Chios and elsewhere, Sparta built
fleets and took the offensive at sea. After naval skirmishing off Ionia, Sparta moved north
toward the Propontis, threatening the Athenian
food supply.

Duration: 415–413 BC (3 Years).

Alcibiades returned to help Athens win a series
of naval battles, but finally it met with disaster
in the Hellespont. With its grain supply cut off,
Athens had to surrender.

During this period, the long-established alliance
structures broke up and reformed. Argos, Elis and
part of Arcadia allied with Athens. In 418, Sparta,
Corinth and Thebes first marched against Argos
(which was saved from defeat by a last minute
truce), then into Arcadia, defeating Argos/Athens
at Mantinea before Athenian reinforcements could
arrive. By sparing the elite Argive “1000”, Sparta
gained Argos as an ally, but a harsh oligarchy it
established there was overthrown a year later.

Duration: 413–404 BC (10 Years). 	

The Syracuse Expedition: 415-413 BC

Playing Time: 2 hours.
Neutrals (no entry): Achaea, Persia, [in Sicily]
Messana, Rhegium, Acragas. Gela is neutral
unless/until any Gelan unit leaves the City.
Units: See the Sicily Setup card for units used
in this scenario.
Cards: Use Bronze & Silver bordered cards
only (cards #12–55).

Setup: Athens
Units: See the Sicily Setup card. Deploy the
units shown where specified. Set the Recruit
Pool aside, face down.
Captured Cities: Leucas, Pylos.
Leader: Alcibiades (+1). Remove card from
deck, place face-up in play.

Setup: Sparta
Units: See the Sicily Setup card. Deploy the
units shown where specified. Set the Recruit
Pool aside, face down.
Captured Cities: Platea, Amphipolis.
Leader: Agis (0). Remove card from deck,
place face-up in play.

Game Start
Place starting forces/Leaders. Shuffle remaining cards, deal 6 to each player.

Sicily Special Rules
1.	Peace of Nicias rules (12.0) are in effect and
the Peace cannot be broken.
2.	Neutral Sicily. In SICILY (see 1.0), Actions
cost double and Pillaging gains no Prestige
unless non-Sicilian pro-Athenian “Expeditionary” units have already been in SICILY
that Year (i.e., in a previous Season).
3.	Units starting in Athens can’t move until 414.
4.	Athens loses 1 Prestige each Year End due to
the Tribute differential in GREECE (Spartan
Tribute 4 / Athens Tribute 3).
5.	Units recruited in GREECE can go to SICILY. Sicilian units cannot leave SICILY.

Playing Time: 4 hours.
Neutrals: Achaea, Persia, Sicily. Gela is neutral unless/until any Gelan unit leaves the City.
Units: Both sides use units #1–46.
Cards: Use Bronze & Silver bordered cards
only (cards #12–55).

Setup: Athens [Prestige: +3]
Units: See 413 Setup card—Athens. Place the
units shown where specified. Units #1–46 not
shown go in the friendly Recruit Pool, face
down.
Captured Cities: Leucas, Pylos.
Leader: Proboulois (0). Remove card from
deck, place face-up in play.

Setup: Sparta
Units: See 413 Setup card—Sparta. Place the
units shown where specified. Units #1–46 not
shown go in the friendly Recruit Pool, face
down.
Captured Cities: Platea, Amphipolis.
Leader: Agis (0). Remove card from deck,
place face-up in play.

Game Start
Place starting forces/Leaders. Shuffle remaining cards, deal 6 to each player.

413 Special Rules
1.	Sparta has broken the Peace and lost 3 Prestige. War Resumes (12.1) is in effect:
• Reduced Tribute (halved, round down).
• Decelea (Thebes City Capacity = 12).
2.	Persian units and Spartan improved (E1)
fleets cannot be recruited unless Persian
Aid is in play. Persian territory can then be
entered and Revolt rules are altered (13.0).
3.	The Odrysia A3 cavalry unit (#37/white
namebox) can only be Recruited if Athens
has no Leader in play.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

The Peace of Nicias: 421-415 BC

Peace terms included a defensive alliance between
Athens and Sparta, and an exchange of hostages
and conquered cities (which was not honored on
the Spartan side, soon bringing a dissatisfied
faction led by Alcibiades to power in Athens).

In 415, two cities in Sicily requested Athenian
aid in a struggle with Syracuse, a city almost
as large and powerful as Athens or Corinth, one
with Dorian (Spartan) sympathies, and a primary
supplier of food to the Peloponnese. Sensing a
chance to bring Sparta to its knees economically
(and add to its empire), the Athenian assembly
voted to send a sizeable expedition under Nicias
(who opposed it).
After winning an early advantage and besieging
Syracuse, the expedition was utterly defeated with
the loss of half Athen’s fleet and 1/3rd of its army.
Upon learning this in 413 BC, Sparta immediately
reconvened its old alliance to restart the war.

The Decelean War: 413-404 BC

In the second phase, the main Peloponnesian army
was based in Decelea, Boeotia (instead of going
home every winter as had been the case). Revolts
against Athens became more frequent, and it was
hard pressed to cope with the spreading rebellion.
In addition, Sparta gained Persian aid in exchange
for renouncing Greek Ionia, and used this to
build a fleet large enough to challenge Athens.
A protracted sea war resulted, featuring several
major sea battles. Athens won most of these, but
was continually out-built in ships, finally losing
its entire fleet in the Hellespont. Without naval
supremacy, a besieged Athens could no longer
feed itself and surrendered.

Aftermath: 403-370 BC

Sparta installed a murderous tyrannical regime in
defeated Athens, but Athenian rebels reinstituted
democracy within a year. Within a decade, Athens
had recovered its fleet, walls, and independence.
Spartan hegemony lasted less than 3 years. Empire predictably undermined Spartan values and
institutions, and raised enemies and former allies
alike against it. Thirty years later its power was
irrevocably broken at the great battle of Leuctra.
Despite its scientific, political, intellectual and artistic achievements, the great promise of Classical
Greece was never realized, as it never coalesced
into a single state. Many of its discoveries were
lost to mankind and not rediscovered till 2000
years later.

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

15.4 The 415 Campaign
This long scenario combines the Sicily and
413 Campaigns, adding the forces in Greece
missing from the Sicily scenario.
Facing a negative Tribute situation (–1 /Year),
and a large Prestige cost to break the Peace,
Athens must decide whether the opportunity in
Sicily is worth the risk. Conquest of Syracuse
virtually guarantees victory, but it is far away
and more powerful than it appears.
Duration: 415–404 BC (12 Years).
Playing Time: 6 hours.
Neutrals: Achaea, Persia; [in Sicily] Messana,
Rhegium, Acragas. Gela is neutral unless/until
any Gelan unit leaves the City.
Units: ALL units of both sides are used.
Cards: Use Bronze & Silver bordered cards
only (cards #12–55).

Setup: Athens
Units: See 415 Setup card—Athens. Place
the units shown where specified. All units not
shown go in the friendly Recruit Pool, face
down.
Captured Cities: Leucas, Pylos.
Leader: Alcibiades (+1). Remove card from
deck, place face-up in play.

Setup: Sparta
Units: See 415 Setup card—Sparta. Place the
units shown where specified. All other units go
in the friendly Recruit Pool, face down, except
#41–46 which are set aside until War Resumes.
Captured Cities: Platea, Amphipolis.
Leader: Agis (0). Remove card from deck,
place face-up in play.

Game Start
Place starting forces/Leaders. Shuffle remaining cards, deal 6 to each player.

Strategy Notes

The Peloponnesian War was not a quick war: it
lasted 27 years. A sea power confronted a land
power, neither eager to challenge its opponent
on its own “turf”. Both sides viewed it as a war
of attrition, as should players. Though quick
decisions are possible, this is usually the result
of a mistake (for example, a major city being
left under-defended). While always ready to
seize opportunity, players should be prepared
to campaign patiently.
A game Year passes quickly, and then units must
Winter. Game Years should be thought of as
short, sharp campaigns with limited and focused
objectives. Over-dispersion of effort can reduce
prospects for that Year.
Upon receiving cards, players should decide
on a campaign plan for the Year and attempt to
execute it. Unforeseen events and opportunities may arise, but an overall plan ensures that
something may be accomplished unless a better
option appears.
Use of Events should be carefully considered, as
their use reduces the effective length of the Year,
making effective campaigning difficult; bunched
Events in some Years and longer campaigns in
other Years may be preferable.
While establishing Siege is key to most offensive
operations, a besieging army must not be left
exposed to counterattack by superior enemy
forces. A lost battle is almost as damaging as
a lost city. A good response to enemy Siege is
to form a superior army within striking range,
threatening to relieve the City before it can be
reduced. [Of course, with hidden value units,
“superiority” is often uncertain.]
While it is obviously advantageous to build
up strength before operations, remember that
captured Cities contribute Prestige every Year:
early City captures may quickly dominate the
Prestige picture.

415 Special Rules

Credits

1.	Peace of Nicias rules (12.0) are in effect. The
Peace can be broken (12.1).
2.	Neutral Sicily. In SICILY, Actions cost
double and Pillaging gains no Prestige unless
non-Sicilian pro-Athenian “Expeditionary”
units have already been in SICILY that
Game-Year (i.e., in a previous Season).
3.	Sicily Expeditions. For Athens, only the 1st
Expedition (see 415 setup card) can enter
ITALY or SICILY in 415. Only the 2nd Expedition can do so in 414, but it cannot leave
Athens until 414 or War Resumes.
4.	Until Persian Aid (13.0) is in play, Persian
units and Spartan improved (E1) fleets can’t
be Recruited, nor Persian territory entered.
5.	The Odrysia A3 cavalry unit (#37) can only
be Recruited if Athens has no Leader in play.
6.	Sicilian units cannot leave SICILY.

Game Design: Craig Besinque
Game Development: Joel Toppen
Art Director: Rodger MacGowan
Package Design: Rodger MacGowan
Artwork: Mark Simonitch, Donal Hegarty
Rules, Example of Play, Charts Layout:
Neil Randall and Mark Simonitch
Assistance: Ron Hodwitz, Don Clarke, 	
Paul Heldrup, Mats Eden, Johannson
Tee, Vincent Lefavrais, Chris Farrell,
Neil Randall. Tim Taylor, Ken Hole, Jeff
Kuhn, Mark Kwasny, Mike Hoyt, Alex
Besinque, Jeremy Murphy, Rayn ButtGrau, Gary Wright, Cody Sandifer
Production Coordination: Tony Curtis
Producers: Tony Curtis, Rodger MacGowan, Andy Lewis and Mark Simonitch
© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

15

Index
Archers................................................. 2.22
Barbarians............................ 2.1, 2.25, 4.22
Blockade.............................................. 8.21
Borders............................................ 1.1, 1.2
Building (Actions)................................. 4.2
Cards...................................................... 3.0
Cities (& Control).................................. 1.3
Capitulation . ....................................... 8.13
Cavalry........................................ 2.23, 6.41
Combat................................................... 6.0
Combat Rating..................................... 2.14
Control (City/Area)................................ 1.4
DeepSea Crossings............................... 5.22
Disbanding........................................... 9.24
Double Defense.................................... 8.11
Events..................................................... 3.1
Fleets.................................................... 2.26
Forced March/Sail.................................. 5.3
Fortifying............................................... 7.1
Garrisons................................ 2.3, 4.23, 7.3
Greeks........................................... 2.1, 4.22
Group Movement................................... 4.1
Harrying (cavalry)................................ 6.41
Hits....................................................... 6.32
Home City/Town.................................. 2.11
Hoplites................................................ 2.21
Infantry................................................. 2.24
Initiative................................................. 3.3
Leaders................................................. 3.11
Loyalty (City)....................................... 1.31
Movement.............................................. 5.0
Muster.................................................... 5.0
NewYear............................................... 10.0
Olympians (Appeals)........................... 11.0
Peace Offers....................................... 14.22
Peace of Nicias..................................... 12.0
Persian Aid........................................... 13.0
Pillaging............................... 4.3, 5.5, 14.12
Ports....................................................... 1.3
Prestige................................................. 14.1
Quartering / Homing............................ 9.21
Rebel units........................................... 4.22
Recruiting ........................................... 4.22
Retreats.................................................. 6.4
Revolts................................................. 3.12
Rout...................................................... 6.33
Sacrifice (Olympians).......................... 10.3
Scenarios.............................................. 15.0
Sea Areas & Borders.............................. 1.2
Sea Battles.............................................. 6.5
Sea Landings.......................................... 6.6
Sea Transport....................................... 5.21
Siege....................................................... 7.0
Siege Combat......................................... 8.0
Sorties.................................................... 8.3
Tribute....................................... 9.51, 12.11
Trophy / Triumph............................... 14.11
Victory.................................................. 14.0
Winter..................................................... 9.0
Wintering Movement........................... 9.21
Winter Maintenance..................... 4.4, 9.22

HELLENES: Campaigns of the Peloponnesian War

16

Prestige Table

Tribute (Controlled opposing Cities only): +CityValue each New Year.
Battles: Trophy (enemy Retreats)

+1

Triumph (enemy Elim/Panicked)

+2

Sieges: City taken by Attrition/Capitulation

+1

City taken by Assault

+2

Pillaging (opposing CityStates only)

+1

Pillaging (of Athens/Sparta)

+2

Sequence of Play - Game Year

Appeals to Olympians

New Year

Zeus—Cards

•	
•	

Deal 6 cards to each player
New Year Event / Sacrifice

Spring/ Summer/ HighSummer/ Fall

•	Initiative (card play)
•	1st Player Turn
Action Phase
•	 An Event occurs; OR
•	 Actions occur (any order):
Movement / Pillaging / Building
Combat Phase
Battles / Siege Combat
•	2nd Player Turn (as above)

Winter

•	Initiative (card play: NO Events)
•	1st Player Winter Actions
Wintering Movement
•	Homing to Home City (free)
•	Quartering to adj. City (free)
•	Group Moves (cost 1 Action)
Building
Winter Maintenance
Disbanding
•	(2nd Player repeats as above)
•	1st Player SiegeBreaking Combat
Homing Battles

413/415 Special Rules

Immediately discard & re-Draw all 6 cards of
a New Year's card draw (no reshuffle).

Apollo—Recruits

Return all 3 drawn Recruit units and re-draw
3 new blocks. OR: Have the opponent return a
just-placed Recruit and re-draw 3 new blocks.

Ares—Combat

Re-roll the latest and any subsequent unit
attacks by the currently attacking friendly or
enemy Agility class (A/B/C).

Demeter—Siege Attrition

Re-do one entire Siege Attrition dieroll (1 D6/
defending block).

Poseidon—Storms

Re-roll one Storm dieroll.

Hermes—Forced March

Re-roll all failed Forced Marches/Sails of one
Moving Group.

Hera—Appeals

Re-do (overrule) a just-resolved opponent's
Appeal to another Olympian.

(Win: enter City / Lose: Disband)

Sorties
•	(2nd Player repeats as above)
•	1st Player Siege Combat
Siege Assaults / Siege Attrition (triple)
•	(2nd Player repeats as above)
•	Year End
•	Tribute Collection
•	Victory Check
•	Advance Year marker
•	Collect & Shuffle cards

Spring–Fall
Winter

Season

Storm†

No Storm

Spring/Winter

1–3

4–6

Summer/Fall

1–2

3–6

HighSummer

1

2–6

† Check each fleet for ship damage

Ship Damage (from Storms)
Die-Roll

Siege Attrition
Season

Storms (Deep Sea Crossings)

Die-Roll

Result

1

1 cv loss

1–3

1 cv loss

Result

1–3 (Gale}

Fleet Eliminated

4–6 (High Seas)

Fleet –1 cv*

* Carried land unit may have to reduce cv to
remain smaller than its carrying fleet

GMT Games, LLC
P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
www.GMTGames.com

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC

Peace of Nicias (12.0)
•	No Revolt, Helot Uprising, Persian Aid or
Taxes events. No Rebel unit recruitment.
•	On land, units must remain at Home; City
Capacity = triple City Value. All Forced
Marches succeed
•	At sea, units may move freely without conflict but must end movement at Home or its
Offshore Sea. All Forced Sails succeed.
•	Athens –1 Action/ turn (Public Works) unless Sicily Campaign in effect (6+ Expeditionary units in Sicily).
War Resumes (12.1)
•	Breaking the Peace incurs a Prestige cost.
Year

415

414

413

412

411

410+

Sparta

–5

–4

–3

–2

–1

0

Athens

–10

–8

–6

–4

–2

0

•	Reduced Tribute: half Tribute, round down.
•	Decelea—Thebes' City Capacity = 12.
•	Add Persians/E1 fleets to Spartan Recruit
Pool.
Sicily Neutral
[No non-Sicilian pro Athenian ‘Expeditionary’
units have been in Sicily this year.]
•	Actions in Sicily cost double.
•	No Prestige for Pillaging in Sicily.
[The above rules are canceled if Athenian Expeditionaries have been in Sicily in a previous
Season this Year.]
Persian Aid & Revolts
•	1 Persian Aid—No Spreading Revolts.
•	2 Persian Aid—No Regional Revolts.
•	3 Persian Aid—No Revolts of any kind.

Forced Marches / Forced Sails
Unit

Failure†

Success*

Regular

1–4

5–6

Elite

1–2

3–6

† Unit remains in previous area
* Unit can move one extra area (or not)

