R ULE BOOK

~ The Supremacy of Cavalry in the Crusader Era ~
11th-12th Century

Table of Contents
1.0 	 Introduction............................................................. 	2
2.0 	 The Components..................................................... 	2
3.0 	 Victory.................................................................... 	4
4.0	 Sequence of Play..................................................... 	4
5.0	Leaders.................................................................... 	4
6.0	 Activation and Continuity....................................... 	5
7.0	Movement............................................................... 	6
8.0	Facing..................................................................... 	7
9.0	 Zones of Control (ZOC)......................................... 	7

10.0	Stacking.................................................................. 	7
11.0	 Missile Fire............................................................. 	8
12.0	Shock...................................................................... 	9
13.0	Charging................................................................. 	11
14.0	 Combat Results....................................................... 	13
15.0	 Rallying Units......................................................... 	14
16.0	 Knights and Other Special Unit Types................... 	14
17.0 Index........................................................................ 	16
Example of Combat......................................................... 	17

GMT Games, LLC
P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
www.GMTGames.com

Rules Version 1.2 (1.1 changes in red, 1.2 in blue)

Infidel Rules Manual

2

1.0 Introduction
Men of Iron is a play-oriented series of games covering the wide
spectrum of land battles from, roughly, the era just prior to the
first Crusades to the arrival of gunpowder.

There are several different types of combat units, divided into
two groups: mounted units (cavalry) and units on foot (infantry).
The reverse side of each combat unit is its “Disordered” side. If
there is no reverse side, the unit cannot be Disordered (and is,
instead, Retired).

The second volume in the series, Infidel, focuses on the major
battles of the early Crusades era between the Christians and the
Muslims (although there were battles with some of each on both
sides). This is a period that saw cavalry reign supreme, and pitted the European heavy cavalry—armored “knights”—systems
against the Eastern/Turkish light cavalry tactics.
The purpose of the Men of Iron series is to provide gamers with
accessible, fast-playing, fun games of low complexity. To that
end, much detail has been either omitted or factored in to overall
mechanics. We have tried to provide as much period flavor and
historical accuracy as we can, within that stated focus.

Sample Combat Unit (Medium Cavalry/Archer)
Front
Unit ID Number
Nationality

Unit Type

Command Stripe

Movement Allowance

Back (Disordered side)
Disordered Shock
Defense DRM

Disordered Symbol

	

Getting into the game: Veteran gamers will find most of the
rules quite familiar, as they use concepts basic to almost all
simulation games. The sections on Continuity and some of the
combat mechanics are not quite so familiar. Gamers new to the
hobby should read once through the rules so they know the basic
premises, pick out a scenario, and play a few player turns to see
how everything works.

–1 Fire DRM
Reminder

Disordered Movement
Allowance

Other Combat Units
Knights
(KN)

Heavy Cavalry (HC)

	
Medium Cavalry
(MC)

Each game includes:
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Shock Defense DRM

Medium Cavalry –
Archers (MC\A)

	
Two 22" x 32" game-maps, backprinted
560 counters on two sheets
Two identical 11" x 17" Player Aid Cards
One 8.5" x 11" Player Aid Card
One Rules Manual
One Battle Book
Two ten-sided dice

Light Cavalry –
Archers (LC\A)

Archers
(A)

	
Crossbowmen
(CB)

Archers with Flails
(AF)

Men-at-Arms
(MA)

Pike Infantry
(PK)

Pike Infantry
Javelineers
(PKJ)

Camp Followers
(CF)

	

2.0 THE COMPONENTS

	

2.1 The Maps
The game maps cover the area over which the battles (supposedly) were fought. Each map is overlaid with a grid of hexagons—
hexes—that are used to regulate movement and fire. Any terrain
peculiarities are discussed in the rules for the individual battles.

	

Wagons

Carrocio

	

2.2 The Counters

Markers

We have four types of counters: leaders, combat units, Standards,
and status markers (Retired, etc.).
Sample Leader
Name &
Command Stripe

	
Activation Rating
Command Range

Nationality

	

	

	

	Charge	 Counter-Charge	 Retired	
Continued	
		Used		
Attack –1

Shock

Movement Allowance

Overall Commander
Crusader Charisma

	
	 Out of	
	Command	
		

	

	
Number of	
Successful	
Continuations

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

	
Flight	
Points	

	
Victory	
Standard
Points			

Infidel Rules Manual

Unit Types of Infidel
A: Archers
AF: Archers with Flails
CB: Crossbowmen
HC: Heavy Cavalry
K: Knights
LC\A: Light Cavalry Archers
MA: Men-at-Arms
MC: Medium Cavalry
MC\A: Medium Cavalry Archers
PK: Pike Infantry
PKJ: Pike Infantry Javelineers

3

FP (Flight Points): See section 3.0 Victory.
Free Activation: A non-continuity/non-seized Activation. It is
a Free Activation if your opponent Passes, your opponent fails
a Continuity roll, fails a Seizure roll, or is the first Activation
of the game.
Leader Casualty Check: The DR to determine if a leader dies
in combat. See section 5.5.
Loss Check: The die roll to see if you lose the game. See section 3.0.
Missile Unit: All Archer, Archers with Flails, Crossbowmen,
Light Cavalry Archer, Medium Cavalry Archer, and Pike Infantry
Javelineer units are missile units.
Mounted Unit: Heavy Cavalry, Light Cavalry Archers, Medium
Cavalry, and Medium Cavalry Archers are mounted units.

2.3 The Die
The game uses a ten-sided die to resolve combat and
other factors for which performance will vary. A ‘0’ is a
“zero”, not a “ten”.

2.4 Definitions & Abbreviations
It might help to be familiar with the following game terms, some
of which are found in individual battles only:

Non-Active: All units that do not belong to the Active Command.
OC (Overall Commander): The army Commander. See section 5.1.
Seizure: The game mechanic wherein one player tries to take
away the other player’s Activation.
Shock: A term for hand-to-hand combat.

Activation: All of the Moving, Firing, and Attacks of one Command, during which some of the opponents units may react.

Standard: The rallying point for units of a Command or army.
See section 15.2.

Activation Rating: The number on a leader used for Continuation and some other game functions. It ranges from 1 to 5; most
leaders have a value of 2 or 3.

Surrounded: When all hexes/hexsides adjacent to a unit are occupied by enemy units, impassable terrain (to it), or map edges.

Active: The leader and all units of the Command which is Activated (see Activation above).

VP (Victory Points): The battle of Arsuf uses Victory Points
to determine the winner, rather than the standard Flight Points.

Active player: The player who is currently Activating his Commands.

ZOC (Zone of Control): Used to delineate the hexes to the front
of a unit into which that unit exerts its influence. Some units do
not exert a ZOC.

Blocking Terrain: Terrain in a hex which blocks LOS, see 11.4
for a complete list.

2.5 Unit Types & Military Terms

Charisma: The ability of a Crusader leader to inspire Knights
in combat. See section 5.4.
Command: Term used to describe which units may move and
fight. Commands can be identified easily by the color stripe on
the counters. Commands are led by leaders.
Command leader: A leader of a specific group of combat units.
See section 5.1.
Command Range: A number on a leader representing the
number of hexes over which that leader can command his units.
See section 5.2.
Continuity/Continuation: The mechanic used to determine
which player goes next.
Disordered: The state of a unit that has lost cohesion due to
combat. See section 14.2.
DR, DRM: Abbreviations for “die roll” and “die roll modifier,”
the latter being a plus or minus number used to adjust the die roll.
Foot Unit: All Archer, Archers with Flails, Camp Followers,
Crossbowmen, Men-at-Arms, Pike Infantry, Pike Infantry Javelineers, and Wagons are foot units.

Knights and Heavy Cavalry: Heavily (mail) armored, elite,
cavalry units. Lance and sword were the main weapons. The
Knights were usually mounted on destriers, combat horses distinguished from usual riding horses, and especially their Eastern
counterparts, by their strength, musculature and training, rather
than their size. Both types of soldier were usually equally armed/
armored, but the Christian Knights had the psychological benefit
(and sometimes detriment) of the chivalric code, which prized
aggressive, individual combat and the honor it brought above
anything else. They were thus often difficult to command as a
group, especially in an era when Frankish battlefield tactics had
to be cautious.
Medium Cavalry: Charge/shock oriented troops, but not as
heavily armored. They tended more to lances than swords, although the Seljuks of Rum were sword users. The term “medium”
is a game one, but it indicates lighter cavalry that still used shock
combat, but not Charge.
Light Cavalry: Mounted archers, the backbone of Eastern
armies. They excelled in fire and retreat, constant mobility and
flanking maneuvers, which means they need large, open areas to
function best. They were not suited to shock combat.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual

4

Infantry: The pike-armed footmen of the Crusades era was not
a major factor in most battles. Frank infantry, somewhat better
armed and protected than their Eastern counterparts, often included knights that had lost their horses (termed Men-at-Arms
in the game), a constant problem, and these tended to give the
Frank infantry a bit of solidity. But most Saracen/Fatimid infantry
was there for “show” and to increase the size of the army, and
thus extend its flanks.
Missile Units: Eastern armies—especially those we call Saracens—were based on the tactics of mounted archers. While the
Fatimid archers were all foot, the rest of the East mounted theirs.
Frank archers were invariably on foot, and their bows were somewhat bigger than the Eastern bows, which were built for mounted
fire. Saracen (or Turk) mounted cavalry was highly trained in
constant and rapid fire; they were the main attack force, albeit
from a distance. Frank missile units, including crossbowmen,
were more like skirmishers. Most missiles could penetrate the
mail armor of the day, although only at close ranges.

2.6 The Scale

EXAMPLES: A Retired Heavy Cavalry is eliminated, 2 more FP
are added to the track (3 – 1). A Retired Pike unit is eliminated,
0 FP are added to the track (1 – 1).
You may keep track of an army’s Flight
Points on the Flight Point Track.
DESIGN NOTE: The DR adds uncertainty to an army’s breaking
point, something which—while it probably will annoy some player,
somewhere—adds some tension and flavor to the contretemps. This
represents waxing and waning morale, fog of war, and other battlefield
uncertainties.

4.0 SEQUENCE OF PLAY
There are no game-turns in the Men of Iron series. The game
simply starts and keeps going until one player wins. To do this,
the system uses a Continuation Activation mechanic; see 6.0.

When One of Your Commands is Activated

The map scale is about 250 yards per hex.
•	 Each pike infantry unit contains about 600 men.
•	 Each missile infantry unit contains about 300 men
•	 Each mounted unit contains about 150 men
(All of the above is quite loose, and we treat numbers here as
relative, not absolute).
There is no time scale, as there are no turns, in the usual historical game sense. Most battles didn’t last more than a few hours
…some even less. In most cases, it will take longer to play one
of the battles than the battle lasted.

3.0 VICTORY
Victory is primarily achieved by eliminating enemy
units and named leaders. At the end of each Free Activation each player determines their Flight Points and
makes a Loss Check. Each player rolls one die and
adds the player’s Flight Point total (see below). If the DR plus
Flight Points are greater than the Flight Level of that player in
this battle, he loses. If both players’ totals exceed their Flight
Level the battle is a draw. For much of the early parts of the
game, Loss Checks will be unnecessary as players will be unable
to exceed their Flight Level with the roll of one die.

When Activated, a Command’s units may Move and/or Fire, and,
after all movement/fire is completed, they may engage in combat.

When an Activation is Finished
When a Command has finished, that player selects another of
his Commands (but not the Command that just went), giving
his opponent the opportunity to Seize Continuity (see 6.0), and
rolls the die:
1.	 If the DR is the same as or lower than the selected Command
leader’s Activation Rating, that Command is Activated.
2. 	If the DR is higher than that rating, “play” passes to his
opponent, who now has a Free Activation that he may use
to Activate any one Command he wishes, no DR necessary.
Play continues in this manner until one or both players fail their
Loss Check (see 3.0).

Commands
Commands for each battle are identified by the color stripe
across the counter top, corresponding to that of the (sometimes
named) leader.

Who Starts the Game
Each battle in the Scenario Booklet indicates which player goes
first.

The following Flight Points (FP) are added to the DR:
•	 5 FP for losing your Overall Commander.
•	 3 FP for each Eliminated Knight (KN) or Heavy Cavalry
(HC).
•	 2 FP for each other type mounted unit or named leader.
•	 1 FP for each eliminated Foot unit or Retired unit regardless
of type. (If a unit is rallied out of Retired status, adjust the
Flight Point Track accordingly.)

5.0 LEADERS
Every unit in the game belongs to a Command listed specifically
in the Deployment instructions, and as identified by its color
stripes, which correspond to that of the leader. When a Command is Activated, all units and leaders in that Command may
move and fight. Leaders are not considered units and the rules
for units do not apply to them.

When a Retired unit is eliminated, add the difference between
the eliminated value and the retired value.
© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual

5

5.1 Types of Leaders

5.5 Leader Casualties

There are two types of leaders; see 2.2 sample leader counter.

Leaders can get killed. (In game terms, that encompasses being
captured and other not-so-hot events).

Overall
Commander

	

	

		

	

Overall Commander	 Command Leader

•	 Overall Commanders. These command the entire army.
Most OC’s are also leaders (as evidenced by their Command
Stripe and Activation Rating). Others are just OCs and do
not lead Commands; individual scenarios will have rules for
these. Some armies do not have an OC.
•	 Command Leaders. These are the leaders for the units (in
their Command).

5.2 Command Range
A leader’s Command Range is traced in hexes, not Movement
Points, from the leader to the combat unit, this does not need to
be a straight line. Command status is determined at the start of
Activation and stays with the unit throughout that Activation. You
cannot trace Command range through an enemy unit, an enemy
ZOC (9.0) hex not occupied by a friendly unit, or a hex(side)
impassable to all unit types.

•	 By Fire: Anytime an adjusted Fire DR of 9 or more occurs,
and there is a leader in the target hex, roll the die. If the DR is
an ‘8’ or ‘9’ the leader is killed. Otherwise, there is no effect
on the leader. If the combat unit the leader is stacked with
is Retired or Eliminated by missile fire the owning player
places the leader with the nearest unit from his Command,
unless he is surrounded in which case he is killed.
•	 By Shock or Charge: Any time a leader is stacked with
a unit that receives a Disordered, Retired (including a
Retire result that is converted to a retreat by a Knight), or
Eliminated result, roll the die for the leader subtracting his
Activation Rating. If the adjusted DR is 3 or higher that
leader has been “killed”. If he survives, but the combat unit
is Retired or eliminated, there is no effect on the leader, the
owning player places him with the nearest unit from his
Command, unless he is surrounded in which case he is killed.
•	 By Capture: If an enemy unit moves into a hex with only
a leader(s), move that leader and place him with the nearest
unit from his Command (see 5.3 if there are no more units
in his Command). If he is surrounded—by enemy units and/
or ZOC—he is, instead captured, thrown to the ground, and
hacked to ribbons …no DR necessary.

A combat unit not actually within Command Range but adjacent
to a unit that is (or one that is considered in Command by virtue
of this specific rule) is considered to be in Command (in a chain
effect).

Killed/captured named leaders (not replacements) count towards
the Flight Point total.

5.3 Restrictions & Abilities

5.6 Replacement Leaders

A combat unit that is within its leader’s Command Range may
do anything and everything allowed by the rules.

When a leader is killed/captured, at the start of that
player’s next Activation—but after the Command for
that Activation has been chosen and rolled for (if
necessary)—flip the dead leader to its Replacement
leader side and place with any combat unit from that Command.
Replacement leaders are returned as often as necessary.

Units that begin Activation outside their leader’s Command
Range (Out of Command) may not:
•	 Move adjacent to or Charge to an enemy unit.
•	 Move into a hex with an enemy Standard or enemy leader.
•	 In addition, foot units that start in an enemy ZOC hex may
not move.
Leaders that are within Command Range of their Overall Commander have their Activation Rating increased by one for Continuation (6.2) and Seizure (6.3) rolls. This does not apply to the
Overall Commander himself.
Leaders grant an attacking Heavy Cavalry or Knight unit a plus
one (+1) DRM when stacked with the attacking unit.
A Command leader that has had his entire Command eliminated
is removed from play without penalty, as long as he would not
qualify for the capture rule (5.5) in his current hex. He rides off
into the sunset to fight again another day.

5.4 Crusader Charisma
Some of the Crusader leaders have an additional rating: Charisma. This is a DRM you use when any Knights stacked with
that leader are attacking in any way.

Replacements for Overall Commanders never count as Overall
Commanders, only Command leaders.

6.0 ACTIVATION & CONTINUITY
6.1 Activation
When a Command is Activated, all units and leaders in that Command may move and/or fire. After all movement/fire has been
completed, units eligible to do so may Shock attack or Charge.
When the player designates a Command for Activation, the player
may use some or all of that Command’s units, regardless where
they are on the map. Units that start the Activation outside the
Command Range of their leader have certain restrictions (see
5.3).
A player may always “Pass”, instead of Activating or attempting to Activate a Command. If he does that, it is treated as if he
failed a Continuation DR.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual

6

After his first successful Continuation DR, a player
adds one (+1) to his Continuation DR for each new
such attempt. This penalty resets when he fails a Continuation DR, his opponent attempts to Seize Continuity (successfully or not), or he passes.
EXAMPLE: Giuseppe has rolled successfully for Leader A’s
Continuation. He now seeks to roll for Leader B; he must add
one (+1) to that DR. If he also succeeds there, he now adds two
(+2) to the next such DR.

6.2 Continuity
After the Active player has undertaken actions with his chosen
Command, he may attempt to continue his “turn” by selecting
another of his Commands to Activate. He cannot select the
Command that was just Activated, unless the player has only
one Command remaining. After selecting the Command, his
opponent has the opportunity to Seize Continuity (see 6.3), if his
opponent declines, he notes the Activation Rating of the Command’s leader and rolls the die:
1.	 If the (adjusted) DR is the same as or lower than the selected
Command leader’s Activation Rating, that Command is
Activated.
2.	 If the (adjusted) DR is higher than that rating, “play” passes
to his opponent, who now gets a Free Activation (2.4).

6.3 Seizing Continuity
If a player is about to DR for Continuity, his opponent may
attempt to Seize the Continuity before the former rolls the die.
Instead, the non-Active player announces with which Command,
of his, he will attempt the Seizure, rolls the die, and consults the
Activation Rating of that Command’s leader,
•	 If the DR is the same as or lower than that rating, that
Command may undertake actions, and that player is now
the Active player.
•	 If the DR is higher, there is no Seizure; In addition, the
originally Active player gets a Free Activation (2.4) and may
use that Activation to Activate any one Command even the
one that just went!
PLAY NOTE: You cannot Seize a Seizure or Free Activation.
EXAMPLE: Ascalon. The Crusader player goes. He selects
Robert’s Command to Activate. After that Activation, he selects
Raymond’s Command for an attempt at Continuity. The Fatimid
player, however, decides it would be better if that didn’t happen
and announces, before the DR, that he is going to attempt to
Seize Continuity with his Bedouin Cavalry Command. He rolls
the die, getting a ‘6’ which is higher than al-Afdal’s Command
Rating. The Crusader, with a free choice, now decides to Activate
Robert’s Command once again. If the Fatimid player had rolled
a ‘1’, he would have Seized Continuity.

7.0 MOVEMENT
7.1 Movement Procedures
Units and leaders Move and/or Fire in the Move/Fire Phase. Individual units from the Activated Command may move in whatever
order the player wishes; each unit, and any stacked leader moving
with it, must complete its Move and/or Fire before another may
begin its movement. See 11.0 for when missile units may Fire.
Each unit and leader has a Movement Allowance, representing
the number of Movement Points (MP) it may expend in one
Activation. The costs to enter the various types of hexes and
cross certain types of hex sides are listed on the Terrain Effects
Chart for the individual battle..
Units move from one hex to another contiguous hex. Units usually cannot move into a hex occupied by another combat unit,
enemy or friendly, and they have to stop when they enter a hex
in an enemy ZOC (except mounted missile units).
A leader stacked with a unit at the start of the units Activation
may move with that unit, even if the leader belongs to a different
Command than the unit. If a leader begins to move with a unit, it
must continue to do so throughout the unit’s movement and stop
moving when the unit stops. A leader moving on his own uses
the Movement Allowance printed on his counter and uses the
most advantageous column of the Terrain Effects Chart for each
hex entered or hex side crossed. A leader moving alone cannot
enter a hex occupied by an enemy leader, unit, or Standard; in
addition he may not enter a hex in an enemy ZOC (unless that
hex contains a friendly unit). A leader stacked with a unit must
Charge, Counter-Charge, Advance, or Retreat with that unit.

Terrain
Most battlefields feature terrain of varying kinds, all of which
are listed, with their movement effects (in terms of Movement
Points expended; “NA” means entry Not Allowed)) on the Terrain Effects Chart for each scenario/battle. Some hexsides are
uncrossable: no unit may move across these.

7.2 Movement Restrictions
Units may not move off the map (unless allowed by the rules for
the individual battle). If forced to retreat off the map, they are
Eliminated. See the restrictions of Zones of Control, 9.0.
A unit may not move into a hex where enemy reinforcements
enter the map.

7.3 What is Movement, What is Not
There is a difference between moving counters around the map
versus the game mechanic of Movement.
Movement, as a mechanic, is any action that requires the expenditure of Movement Points. Actions that move a unit (e.g.,
retreat, changing facing, Charge, etc.)—but do not require an
expenditure of Movement Points—are not Movement in terms
of a game mechanic.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual

7

7.4 Reinforcements
All reinforcing units and leaders are considered to begin in an
off-map area adjacent to every reinforcement entry hex for their
Command (as defined for this battle in the battle book). Their first
MP spent moves them into any reinforcement entry hex for their
Command; there are no additional costs for other units that may
have entered into the same hex from off map. Every reinforcing
unit and leader can spend its full MA the turn it enters the map.
A reinforcing unit is considered to be in Command and can
Fire Missiles, Shock attack, or Charge the Activation it enters
the map. A reinforcing leader must enter the map with his units.

8.0 FACING
Facing refers to how a unit sits within a hex. A unit must be faced
so that the top of the unit faces one of the hex’s vertices, not the

9.0 ZONES OF CONTROL (ZOC)
All mounted combat units and missile armed infantry, but not
other infantry, exert a ZOC into their frontal hexes. Zones of
Control do not extend into or across hexes or hexsides that a unit
is prohibited from entering or crossing.
DESIGN NOTE: ZOC’s represent a unit’s ability to exert its presence—
usually through fire or mobility—into the space to its front.

If a unit begins its Activation in the ZOC of an enemy unit it may
move to another hex. A unit that begins its move in or enters the
ZOC of an enemy unit during movement may not enter or reenter a hex in the ZOC of the same enemy unit during a single
Activation. This means a unit may move from one enemy unit’s
ZOC to another enemy unit’s ZOC, but not enter or re-enter a hex
in the same enemy unit’s ZOC. A moving unit (except mounted
missile units) must stop if it enters an enemy ZOC.
side of the hex. A unit may ignore this facing when moving, but
once it stops movement or conducts missile fire it must be faced
in a specific direction. The two hexes to each side of the vertex
the unit is facing are Frontal, the two at the other end, the Rear;
the side, Flank.
Facing determines a unit’s Zone of Control, at whom missile units
may fire, and in what direction cavalry may Charge. In general,
this applies to only their (two) frontal hex/hex sides.
Facing does not matter when determining movement direction
(except for Charging cavalry), and units are free to change facing as much as they want during movement, at no cost, unless
they are in an enemy ZOC (see 9.0). However, they may do so
only when Activated.
Exception: Units in an enemy ZOC can only change facing one
vertex, if they stay in the hex. If they are moving out of that hex,
they can change facing any number of vertices.
Changing facing is not considered movement for purposes of
“Fire or Movement”, as it does not expend Movement Points.

•	 +2 MP for a foot unit to exit a hex in the ZOC of an enemy
mounted unit.
•	 +1 MP for any unit to exit a hex in the ZOC of an enemy missile unit. (cumulative with the modifier above).
A mounted missile unit, and any leader stacked with it, may
enter and then exit a hex in an enemy ZOC, regardless of the
unit type exerting the ZOC, in the same turn by paying an additional 1 MP to leave, see 11.0. The prohibition of entering or
re-entering a hex in the ZOC of the same unit during the same
Activation still applies.
Developer Note: the above rather large change clarifies wording and
intent. It does not change the rules.

10.0 STACKING
Combat units may not stack (be together in the same hex) at any
time, even during movement. Leaders, markers, and Standards
stack freely with any unit.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual

8

11.0 MISSILE FIRE
11.1 Missile Units
Missile units—archers (both on foot and mounted), Crossbowmen, and Javelin armed Pike Infantry—are capable of firing at
enemy units (not lone leaders). The Maximum Range—the maximum number of hexes over which that unit may fire is 2 hexes.
You count the target hex, but not the firing hex. Missile units
may fire through their frontal and flank hex sides (8.0), although
when using Reaction fire, that is limited to Frontal hex fire. A LOS
that passes down a hex spine between Flank and Rear counts as
Rear for missile fire, this means that a missile unit may not fire
down those hex spines or use Return Fire if it is fired at down
those hex spines. Archers may fire over other units (see 11.4).

archers firing). The luck of the LC/A is poor and it rolls a 2. A
1 (DR of 2 with a –1 DRM) on the Target Mounted Disordered
column of the Fire Results table equals “No Result.” It then
moves to 3320, spending another 2 MP (1 MP for clear terrain
+ 1 MP to leave the ZOC of the Knight in hex 3519). Finally,
the Turcoman moves back to its starting hex 3220, spending its
last 2 MP (1 MP for clear terrain +1 MP to leave the ZOC of
the Knight in hex 3421).

DESIGN NOTE: Realistically, the maximum range of regular bows
and crossbows—maybe about 350-400 yards—was not much past what
we have as one hex here. However, for play purposes, we have enabled
them to so fire, albeit at minimal effectiveness.
HISTORICAL NOTE: Crossbows—and here we are dealing with the
wooden variety—and both longbows and composite bows, the smaller
but exceptionally sturdy bow of the steppes and East—have about the
same maximum range, with perhaps a slight advantage to bows. The
Crossbows have greater penetration power, especially at short distances,
but the Long/ Composite Bows have a far greater rate of fire, at least
3 to 1, maybe more.

11.2 When Units May Fire
There are three opportunities for Missile Fire, each one available depending on the unit type: Active Fire, Return Fire and
Reaction Fire.
Archers (mounted or on foot) May Fire:
•	 Active Fire, Foot Archers: when they are Activated. A unit
may fire once when its Command is Activated at any time
during Movement. However, once they fire, their movement
for that Activation is finished. Thus, if they fire before
moving they cannot then move.
•	 Active Fire, Mounted Archers: Mounted archers may fire
during their Movement. If in a hex in an enemy ZOC when
they fire, it costs 1 MP to fire, otherwise firing costs 0 MP.
Mounted archers may leave a hex in an enemy ZOC they
have entered in the same Activation, paying an additional
1MP cost to do so. They may not enter another hex in the
same enemy units ZOC during that Activation. Mounted
archers may continue to move before/after firing. A mounted
archer may only fire once in its Activation.
EXAMPLE: The Turcoman LC/A beginning in hex 3220 wants
to fire at the Disordered Knight in the rear of the Crusader
formation. It spends 1 MP moving to hex 3319. It then spends
2 MP to move to hex 3420 (1 MP for clear terrain + 1 MP to
leave the ZOC of the Knight in hex 3419). The LC/A fires at the
Disordered Knight, spending 1 MP because the Knight in hex
3519 exerts a ZOC into 3420, even when Disordered. The Knight
is not forced to Counter-Charge because it is Disordered. From
the Fire/Range DRM Chart, the DRM for the missile fire is a net
–1 (+1 for range, –1 for firing at Knights, and –1 for mounted

HISTORICAL NOTE: The capability of mounted archers (our Light
Cavalry) to do this is part of their harass and disperse tactics, riding
close to the enemy lines, firing quickly, and then riding away, all in a
continual series of squadrons. The Franks learned how to deal with this
by using their fairly mobile heavy cavalry and Counter-Charge tactics,
plus the awareness that Moslem tactics depended greatly on having lots
of area to maneuver, especially around flanks.

•	 Return Fire (Non-Active Only): When fired at by an enemy
Missile unit, if the latter is within Range. The Return Fire
and the Active Fire are resolved simultaneously, before any
results are applied. Archers may not use Return Fire if fired
at through a Rear hex.
•	 Reaction Fire (Non-Active Only): When any enemy unit
moves or Charges into its adjacent frontal hexes. This applies
to each enemy unit that does so and it is resolved the instant
the frontal hex is entered. This does not apply to retreat,
Advance After Combat, or Continued Attack.
PLAY NOTE: Archer units using Reaction or Return Fire may
fire at each enemy unit that becomes “eligible”, as per the above,
any number of times per Activation.
Crossbow and Javelin Units may fire:
•	 Active Fire: When they are Activated. A unit may fire
once when its Command is Activated at any time during
Movement. However, once they fire, their movement for
that Activation is finished. Thus, if they fire before moving
they cannot then move.
•	 Reaction Fire (Non-Active Only): When any enemy unit
moves or Charges into its adjacent frontal hexes. This applies
to only one enemy unit that does so in a given Activation

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual
and it is resolved the instant the frontal hex is entered. They
may use Reaction Fire only once during a given enemy
Activation. This does not apply to retreat, Advance After
Combat, or Continued Attack.
•	 They may not use Return Fire.
PLAY NOTE: The differences between Crossbows, Javelins,
and Composite bows, noted above, are factored into their Missile
DRM and the above mechanic.

9

12.0 SHOCK
DESIGN NOTE: Units’ weapon systems, armor and morale are represented by a combination of the System Matrix and the unit Defensive DRM.

12.1 The Shock Phase

To Fire, check the range and consult the Fire/Range DRM Chart.
The chart gives any DRM for the firing unit at that Range. Now
roll one die, noting whether the target is Disordered or in normal
status. The DRM for Missile Fire Table lists all of the circumstances (as DRM) that provide additions to (or subtractions from)
the DR. Compare the adjusted DR to the Fire Results Table to
get the result, as defined in 14.0.

In the Shock Phase, all (eligible) Activated units
listed as Attacker on the Weapon System Matrix may
(not must) Shock attack. However, if they choose to
do so, they must Shock any/all enemy units that are in
their frontal hexes, unless those units are being attacked by
other friendly units. Any declared attacks must be completed,
there is no ability to “call off” a declared attack. Units not listed
in the “Attacker” row may never Shock attack (or Charge). They
do defend, though. A unit can only participate in one attack per
Activation (Exception: Continued Attack result; 14.6). This attack
can be with or without other units against a single defender or
by itself against two defenders in its frontal hexes.

EXAMPLE: An archer firing at a range of 1 hex gets a DRM of
+1. But if he is firing at Knights or Heavy Cavalry, that incurs
an additional DRM of –1, for an accumulated DRM of ‘0’.

EXAMPLE: Three units attack two defending units. The attacker
must choose to attack one defender with two units and the other with
1 unit, the middle unit cannot split its attack against both defenders.

During Reaction Fire, if multiple units react to a single unit, the
firing player chooses the order of fire resolution and results are
applied immediately, as they occur. The instant the unit is no
longer in the hex that caused the Reaction Fire (due to retreat,
Retire, or Elimination), Reaction Fire ends.

12.2 Retreat Before Combat

11.3 Resolving Fire

Angle of Fire: Missile Fire aimed at Medium or Light Cavalry
through the latter’s Flank hexsides earns the firing unit a +1 DRM.
Fire that passes down a hex spine does not count as Flank. This
reflects firing at the easier-to-hit, unprotected flanks of the horses.
HISTORICAL NOTE: Missiles, especially crossbow shafts, could
pierce the mailed armor and shields of the better-protected enemy, although the latter were better off than the lesser armored men. However,
this ability dissipated greatly with distance (as well as angle of fire), so
the distance factor. The ability of knights to close quickly against missile
fire became part of the tactics.

11.4 Line Of Sight (LOS)
A unit must be able to see a unit to fire at it. To do so, the player
must be able to trace an unblocked LOS from the center of the
firing hex to the center of the target hex. LOS is blocked
•	 by Woods, Garden, Drumlin, and City hexes. You may fire
into these hexes, but not through one.
•	 if the LOS passes through any intervening slope which is
higher—of greater elevation—than both the firing and target
hex. It may be necessary to use a string to measure between
hexes to determine this LOS case.
•	 Crossbowmen may not fire through other units. Archers may.
(They’re actually firing over them.)
If a hex contains terrain considered blocking terrain, then the
entire hex is treated as blocking, not just the graphic feature
inside the hex.
However, a LOS may be traced along a hexside if only one of the
hexes adjoining the hexside contains blocking terrain.

Mounted units that are not Disordered may Retreat Before
Combat if attacked solely by foot units, by moving one hex
away from all attacking units. The Retreating unit must be able
to end its Retreat one hex away from all attacking units or it
may not Retreat. They may not enter a hex in an enemy ZOC,
the path of a Charge, or an occupied hex, but they may change
facing at will. One attacker may advance into the vacated hex, if
the player so wishes, but may not then Shock or change facing.
If one attacker is attacking two defenders and both defenders
Retreat Before Combat, the attacker may pick which hex to
advance into as above. If only one defender retreats, resolve the
attack on the other.
DESIGN NOTE: There is no penalty for mounted units retreating before
shock against dismounted units, unlike in Men of Iron Vol I. This reflects
the superiority of cavalry in this era.

Light Cavalry, that are not Disordered, may Retreat Before Shock
or Charge if attacked by Knights, Heavy Cavalry, or Medium
Cavalry by moving one hex away from the attacking unit and
then rolling the die, adjusting the DR by the Retreating unit’s
Defensive DRM rating.
•	 If the adjusted DR is 5 or less, the Retreat has no negative
effect.
•	 If the adjusted DR is 6 or more, the unit retreats but is
Disordered.
However, if such attack is a Counter-Charge (see 13.6) the above
DR results change to:
•	 If the adjusted DR is 3 or less, the Retreat has no negative
effect.
•	 If the adjusted DR is 4-7 or more, the unit Retreats but is
Disordered.
•	 If the adjusted DR is an 8 or more, there is no Retreat
allowed, move the unit back to its original hex and resolve

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual

10
the Charge.

All of the restrictions on Retreat Before Combat, and the ability
of an attacking unit to Advance, listed in the first paragraph also
apply to Light Cavalry Retreat Before Combat.

1. Strength Advantage: The player with the higher number of
units receives the differential between the number of units as a
DRM.

Retreat Before Combat applies to any attack, including a
Continued Attack.

EXAMPLE: One Heavy Cavalry unit attacks two infantry units.
There is a –1 Strength (Dis-)Advantage DRM to the Shock resolution for each infantry unit.

12.3 Shock Resolution

The Strength Advantage, or Disadvantage, that the defense may
have is applied (as a DRM) to each separate DR.

DESIGN NOTE: Shock resolution uses a mechanic somewhat different
from most games of this type. Shock/Charge is resolved against each
defending unit individually, regardless of how many units are attacking
and/or how many units are being attacked.

PLAY NOTE: If one unit is attacking two units, the attacker
will roll twice, each with a –1 DRM …and undergo possible
adverse results twice.

Order of Shock Resolution
Shock is resolved after all Movement is finished, in the following order:
1. 	The Active player designates which of his units are attacking
which defending units, including Charges.
2. 	One at a time, the Active player moves each Charging
unit adjacent to its target. Any Reaction fire caused by this
move is resolved. If required, the Charging unit makes a
Charge Reluctance roll. Any Retreat Before Combat by the
defender is resolved at this time. The defender attempts any
Counter-Charges of which he is capable.
3. 	The Active player resolves all his Shock and Charge attacks,
in any order he wishes. The Charge Table is used as long as
at least half of the units in an individual attack succeeded
in Charging (not Disordered by reaction fire, not Reluctant,
not Counter-Charged); otherwise the Shock Table is used.
Advances are taken and Continued Attack markers are
placed.
PLAY NOTE: Attacks by a single attacker against multiple
defenders are resolved at the same time, and they are considered to be going on simultaneously, with results (which
can be cumulative) applied after both attacks are resolved.
4. 	All Continued Attacks are now resolved. Begin again
at Step 1, except that all units marked with a Continued
Attack marker (only those units) must attack; Charging and
Counter-Charging is not allowed.
All of the below are cumulative; “+” DRMs favor the Attacker;
“–” DRMs favor the Defender.

Die Roll Modifiers for Resolving Shock
To resolve Shock, roll the die, then apply any DRM that apply
from the following situations.
1. Strength Advantage
2. Position Advantage
3. The Defender’s Shock Defense DRM
4. Leader Presence
5. Unit type (Weapons System Matrix)
6. Attacker Status (Disorder/Charging unit moved)
7. Defender’s Status (Retired)
8. Continued Attack

EXAMPLE: A Knight unit Shock attacks two LC. In resolving
each defender separately, the Knight gets a Continue Attack
against the first, but is Disordered in the second combat. The
Knight must then Continue Attacking, but is Disordered.
2. Position Advantage: There are 2 types of position advantage:
A. Angle of Attack: This reflects the advantage of attacking
from an angle other than (only) frontally (only one applies):
•	 If any Shock/Charge attacking units are attacking through
a Defender’s Flank, there is a +2 DRM
•	 If any Shock/Charge attacking units are attacking through
a Defender’s Rear, there is a +3 DRM
•	 If the attackers are attacking through two or more sides
(Front, Rear, Left Flank, or Right Flank) of a unit there is
a +4 DRM
B. Terrain: See the Terrain Charts for the individual battles
for the effects of terrain on combat. The row for the defender’s
terrain is used with the column for the attacker’s unit type
(i.e. Mounted or Foot) to find the modifier for each attack. If
more than one unit is being attacked, the terrain of each individual defending unit is what matters. If there is more than
one attacker with different terrain considerations (e.g., one is
attacking across a river, the other isn’t) then the terrain DRM
most favorable to the defender is used.
3. Shock Defense DRM: The defending unit’s—not the attacker’s—individual Shock Defense DRM is added.
EXAMPLE: A Templar Knight is attacked by two Ayyubid Medium Cavalry from the front. The Knight’s Shock Defense Rating
is –3, which is added to the strength advantage the Ayyubid have.
This makes the cumulative modifier 1+ (–3) = –2!
4. Leader Presence. Knights and Heavy Cavalry units stacked
with their Command leader or the Overall Commander gain a +
1 DRM when attacking. A Crusader leader with Charisma also
adds their Charisma rating as a DRM to the attack. This only
applies once, no matter how many leaders a unit is stacked with.
5. Weapons/Armor Comparison. The Attacker uses the Weapons System Matrix to compare his Attacking unit Type to that of
the Defender. The matrix provides the appropriate DRM. If an
attacker is doing so with two units, each of a different type, he
may use the DRM with the best benefit for the Attacker.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual
EXAMPLE: A Fatimid Pike Infantry (0) and a Sudanese Archer
with Flails (+1) are attacking a Crusader Pike Infantry. The +1
DRM would be used.
Play Note: Use the MC column for MC/A units.
6. Attacker Status: 2 attacker statuses can affect an attack:
•	 Disorder: If any Attacker is Disordered, there is a –2 DRM.
(Defenders’ Disorder status is covered by the chart itself.)
•	 Move before Charge: If any Charging Attacker moved
during its Activation, there is a -1 DRM.
7. Defender Retired. If the Defender is Retired (14.4) add two
(+2) to the Attacker’s DR, and use the Disordered portion of the
Combat Resolution Table.
8. Continued Attack. Units undertaking Continued Attacks
(see 14.6) earn a cumulative –1 DRM for each such attack it
undertakes in that Activation.
To resolve the Shock, roll the die for each defending unit, apply
the DRMs and consult the appropriate Combat Results Table. If
at least half of the attacking units are Charging, use the Charge
Table, otherwise use the Shock Table. Look under the column
appropriate to the defending unit’s status (Normal or Disordered)
to find the result.

11

13.0 CHARGING
Charging is a method of Shock attack in which the attacking units
use their weight and momentum to obtain a more favorable result.
It is thus available solely to (some) mounted units.
PLAY NOTE: Experience, from previous designs using this system, has shown us that this is the one section of rules that causes
some confusion, mostly because of the number of possibilities
it raises. We’ve tried to cover as many of these as possible, but
if we have failed to do so, and you are stumped beyond repair,
try to visualize what is happening and the rules are attempting
to portray. That’s what we do when we write them.
It helps to remember that Charge is just another form of Shock
that uses a different Combat Results Table.

13.1 Which Units May Charge
Only Knights and Heavy Cavalry can Charge. Charge is not
Movement; it is part of Combat.
•	 Knights and Heavy Cavalry that start their Activation
adjacent to an enemy unit may not Charge during Activation.
•	 Disordered Knights and Heavy Cavalry may not Charge;
they may still Shock without a Charge.

12.4 Advance After Combat

13.2 Charge Procedure

Advance is part of combat resolution and is undertaken after a unit has finished all of its attacks, if a
defender vacates a hex as a result of a Shock or Charge
attack. The attacker must, if possible, Advance one of
his eligible attacking units into that hex. A unit is ineligible to
Advance if:

To Charge, a Knight or Heavy Cavalry unit must start the Shock
Phase with a LOS (see 11.4) and either one or two hexes between
it and the target unit. The path to the target must be through the
unit’s frontal hexes and it may only change facing one vertex to
reach the target which must end in the Charging unit’s frontal
hexes. A Charge is a special form of Shock that targets only one
unit, an exception to 12.1. If a Charging unit is Disordered during
its Charge, the attack is resolved as a Shock attack against the
original target of the Charge, the Disordered unit is not required
to attack all units in its frontal hexes.

•	 It is Disordered or a Foot unit, and not marked with a
Continued Attack marker (14.7).
•	 It would have to cross or enter terrain that it is prohibited
from moving across or into.
If more than one unit attacked follow the priorities below to
determine which unit must Advance.
1.	A Charging unit
2.	A Mounted unit
3.	A non-Disordered unit
If a unit attacked more than one defender and both hexes are
vacated, the attacker chooses which hex to Advance into. The
advancing unit may change its facing as it wishes after such
advance (unless a Continued Attack resulted, in which case no
facing change is allowed).
PLAY NOTE: Remember that Disordered units and infantry
only Advance due to Continued Attack results.
PLAY NOTE: A Continued Attack result always forces the unit
obtaining it to Advance and attack, regardless of any other combat
results that unit incurs, including retreat.

All Charges are designated prior to actually resolving
any one Charge, along with other Shock attacks in Step
1 of the Shock Phase. Charges are resolved by moving
the Charging unit adjacent to the target, in Step 2 of
the Shock Phase. (Remember, this is not actual game Movement,
so there is no use of Movement Points.)

13.3 Charge Restrictions
Knights and Heavy Cavalry may not Charge across rivers or steep
slope hexsides, nor may they Charge a unit in a Woods, Marsh,
City or Rough hex. Knights and Heavy Cavalry may not Charge
into or across terrain which they are prohibited from moving into.
They may Shock into/across those hexes/sides without a Charge
(see 12.0 SHOCK), as long as there is not an NA in the Shock/
Charge column of the TEC for mounted units. A Charge may
not cross a hex in an enemy ZOC, but may end in a ZOC hex.
The Charging unit must have a path free of friendly or enemy
combat units to the target at the time the Charge is declared.
The path cannot be shared with other Charging units and must
include the hex, adjacent to the target, the Charging unit will
end its Charge in.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual

12

13.4 Benefits and Results of a Charge
Charging Knights and Heavy Cavalry resolve their attack using
the Charge Table (not the Shock Table).
Any Charging unit that has moved (used Movement Points) in
that Activation, prior to the Combat portion of its Activation
subtracts one (–1 DRM) from its Charge Resolution DR.
A unit that has Charged and attained a “Continue Attack” result
is no longer Charging when it resolves the Continued Attack. The
“Continued Attack” is resolved as regular Shock.

13.5 Charge Reluctance
Horses do not like to “Charge” a heavily defended line of Pike
Infantry (showing much more common sense than their riders).
To reflect this, whenever Heavy Cavalry (but not Knights!!) are
Charging a Pike Infantry or Men-at-Arms unit through its frontal
hex, the Charging player rolls the die, adjusting that DR by the
Charging unit’s Shock Defense DRM.
•	 If the adjusted DR is 6 or less, the attacking unit successfully
Charges
•	 If the DR is a 7 or more, the Charge is blunted by the
reluctance of the horses to close, and the unit must attack
using the Shock Table, not the Charge Table.
EXAMPLE: A Saracen Heavy Cavalry with a Defender DRM
of –1 rolls a ‘7’ when checking for Reluctance. The DRM of –1
adjusts that to a ‘6’, so he completes his Charge. If he had rolled
an ‘8’, he would have to use the Shock Table, instead.
A unit which passes a Counter-Charge DR does not roll for
Charge Reluctance.

Charge or Shock, but may not change facing during the CounterCharge. The Counter-Charge path must be through its frontal
hexes and the target(s) must end in the unit’s frontal hexes.
If a unit is attacked by enemy units using both Shock and Charge
combat, the owner may choose Counter-Charge either the Shocking Attackers or the Charging Attackers (but not both). A unit
may Counter-Charge more than one unit, but all Counter-Charged
units must end in the Counter-Charging unit’s frontal hexes.

13.7 Counter-Charge Against Cavalry Charge
Counter-Charge against an enemy Cavalry Charge attack reflects
the ability of Knights and Heavy Cavalry to negate the momentum of any such enemy attack by launching its own Charge.
To Counter-Charge, the defender rolls the die before the enemy
Charge against the Heavy Cavalry or Knight is resolved;
•	 add the Counter-Charging unit’s Defense DRM;
•	 if the Counter-Charging unit must change facing to effect
the Counter-Charge add one (+1) to the DR.
If the adjusted DR is 3 or less, the unit has successfully Counter-Charged and the Charge of that Attacker has been negated and the Charge marker replaced with a Shock marker.
If the adjusted Counter-Charge Attempt DR is 4 or more the
Counter-Charge fails and the unit does not change facing if it
was attempting to do so as part of the Counter-Charge.
After Counter-Charging have been resolved, if at least half the
Attackers are marked with a Charge marker, the Charge table is
still used when resolving the attack. Otherwise, the Shock Table
must be used when resolving the attack.

PLAY NOTE: As you can see, Knights do not undergo Charge
Reluctance. They and their superbly trained warhorses never
showed any reluctance to do so, regardless of the situation.

13.8 Counter-Charge Against Shock

DESIGN NOTE: Yes, the die rolls are different from MoI Vol I. This
reflects the superiority of cavalry in this era.

Counter-Charge against an enemy Shock attack (by infantry or
cavalry) reflects the ability of Knights and Heavy Cavalry to
negate the force of any such enemy attack by launching a Charge.

13.6 Counter-Charge

To Counter-Charge, the defender rolls the die before the Shock
is resolved;

Heavy Cavalry and Knights may attempt to Counter-Charge when
Charged, Shock attacked, or they suffer missile fire through their
front or flank hexsides. Disordered Heavy Cavalry and Knights
or Heavy Cavalry and Knights units that began the Activation
in the ZOC of another enemy unit may not attempt to CounterCharge. Unlike a Charge, a Heavy Cavalry or Knight unit can
Counter-Charge a unit in an adjacent hex. Counter-Charges must
meet all restrictions in 13.3.
PLAY NOTE: If a Knight or Heavy Cavalry begins an Activation in the ZOC of a unit, place a Counter-Charge Used marker
on it for reference.
Only the non-Active player’s units may CounterCharge. Only one Counter-Charge per Activation is
allowed. Once a unit has attempted to Counter-Charge
place a Counter-Charge Used marker on it as a reminder. A defending Heavy Cavalry or Knight unit may change
facing one vertex if it succeeds in Counter-Charging Against

•	 Add the Counter-Charging unit’s Defense DRM;
•	 If the Counter-Charging unit must change facing to effect
the Counter-Charge add one (+1) to the DR.
If the adjusted DR is 4 or less, the unit has successfully CounterCharged. The original Attacker is still the Attacker, but now he
must subtract two (–2) from his DR when resolving the attack.
This applies even if the attack includes Charging units and will
be resolved on the Charge Table. In cases where one Attacker
is attacking two defending units, a successful Counter-Charge
by one Defender applies the Counter-Charge modifier only to
the resolution of the attack against the Counter-Charging unit.
If the adjusted Counter-Charge Attempt DR is 5 or more the
Counter-Charge fails and the unit does not change facing if it
was attempting to do so as part of the Counter-Charge.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual

13

13.9 Counter-Charge Against Fire

14.1 The Combat Results Tables

Enemy Missile Fire may induce targeted Knights and Heavy
Cavalry to Charge the firing units.

Missile Weapons use the fire Charts and Tables. Charging Knights
and Heavy Cavalry use the Charge Table. All other Shock attacks
use the Shock Table.

•	 For Knights, this inducement is automatic—they must
Counter-Charge when fired at if they are not Disordered or
already in a hex in an enemy ZOC.
•	 For Heavy Cavalry, it is voluntary.
For Heavy Cavalry: The process and the DR is the same as for
Counter-Charge against Shock, except that the Counter-Charge
DR is made before the Fire is resolved, the missile fire is resolved,
and then if the Counter-Charge DR was successful the CounterCharge takes place, with the Heavy Cavalry moved adjacent
to the firing /missile unit and then performing a Charge attack
(If the Counter-Charge DR failed the unit stays where it is and
does not change facing, its Counter-Charge being unsuccessful).
For Knights: A Knight unit must Counter-Charge an enemy unit
that is firing at it, unless there is no clear Charge Path, in which
case there is no possibility of Counter-Charge. If the Knight
Counter-Charges, the procedure is the same as Heavy Cavalry
above. If the player does not want his Knight to Counter-Charge
and its Command leader is in Command Range (see 5.2), he must
roll one die, from which he subtracts the Command leader’s
Activation Rating.
•	 If the adjusted DR is 3 or less, no Counter-Charge takes place
•	 If the adjusted DR is 4 or more, the Knight Counter-Charges.

Shock and Charge combat results depend on whether the defending unit is Normal or Disordered. Missile Fire results depend
on whether the target is mounted or infantry and Normal or
Disordered. There are separate results columns for each status.
PLAY NOTE: Remember, Shock/Charge is resolved separated
for each, individual defending unit.

14.2 Disorder
When a unit is Disordered, flip the counter to its “Disordered”
side. If there is no Disordered side, the units is, instead, Retired.
The effects of being Disordered are:
•	 –1 to its Movement Allowance (as noted on the counter),
this penalty does not apply until the units next Activation if
the Disorder result occurred during movement.
•	 –1 if firing missiles while Disordered (as noted on the
counter).
•	 Reduced Defender DRM Rating when Shock attacked/
Charged (as noted on the counter).
•	 Shock attacks made by Disordered units incur a –2 DRM.
•	 A Disordered unit may not Charge or Counter-Charge.
•	 A Disordered unit may not Retreat Before Combat.

PLAY NOTE: Remember, restraining those impetuous Knights
is voluntary on the part of the player. Also remember that Light
Cavalry Archers have that Retreat Before Combat ability, which
is the main part of their tactics against Knights.

Additional Disorder results have no further effect on a unit which
is already Disordered.

If the successfully Counter-Charging unit is Disordered by the
fire which initiated the Counter-Charge (as above), the CounterCharge is still undertaken, but is resolved as a normal Shock
attack. Any Light Cavalry Retreat Before Combat still rolls on
the Light Cavalry Retreat Before Counter-Charge Table.

A unit that must Retreat must move one hex away from the unit(s)
inflicting the result. It must end its retreat one hex from every unit
which participated in the attack that caused the retreat. It may
not Stack, and it may not move into a hex occupied by an enemy
unit, but may move into a hex occupied solely by an enemy
leader (see 5.5) or Standard. It may move into an enemy ZOC,
and it may change facing. If its retreat is blocked by a friendly
foot-archer/crossbowmen unit, it may retreat through that unit an
extra hex. If it does so, the Missile unit is Disordered; if already
Disordered, it is Retired. Any leader stacked with the Retired
missile unit must make a Leader Casualty Check (5.5) as if the
unit suffered the Retire result from Shock combat.

Any Counter-Charge attack is resolved immediately (as stated
above). The Counter-Charge ends the movement of the missile
unit, even if it would still otherwise be eligible to move after firing (mounted archers). Any Continued Attacks that result from
a Counter-Charge Against Fire should be resolved immediately.
Treat this as a mini-Shock Phase for just this unit. The Continuing unit must attack all units in its frontal hexes, those units can
Retreat Before Combat, and there can be more Advances and/
or Continued Attacks.

14.0 COMBAT RESULTS
SUGGESTION: Please refer to the Fire, Shock, and Charge
Combat Results Tables located on the Infidel Player Aid Card
while reading this section.

14.3 Retreat

If it cannot retreat, satisfying the above conditions, it is eliminated. Any leader stacked with the unit must make a Leader
Casualty Check (5.5) as if the unit suffered the Eliminated result
from Shock combat.
Note: If the unit and leader are totally surrounded, the leader
will be eliminated also, per 5.5.

14.4 Retire
Pick up the unit and place it as close to its Standard as
you can, including in the Standard hex—place a “Retired” marker on top of it—unless that unit is unable
to trace a route to the Standard not blocked by enemy

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

14

Infidel Rules Manual

units and impassable terrain (but not ZOC), in which case it is
Eliminated. The hex chosen must not be adjacent to the enemy
units that caused the Retire result, if this is not possible, it is
Eliminated. Retired units are counted towards that army’s Flight
Level (see 3.0).
Retired units have a Movement Allowance of 1 hex per Activation, and may (if they need to) move only towards their Standard.
If a Retired unit is attacked or fired upon, treat it as Disordered,
but add two (+2) to the Shock Resolution DR. Any Retreat,
Disorder, or Retire result results in that unit being Eliminated.
If a Command or army’s Standard has been captured, a Retired
result becomes an Eliminated result.
PLAY NOTE: Retired units are Activated along with other units
in their Command.

14.5 Eliminated
The unit is no longer effective as a fighting force and is finished
for the day. Remove it from the board. Eliminated units are
counted towards that army’s Flight Level (3.0).
PLAY NOTE: Eliminated does not mean that all men in the unit
have been killed. It represents the loss of men and/or catastrophic
loss of morale past the point the unit can remain effective.

14.6 Continued Attack
After all combats are resolved, another Shock Phase
is conducted for all units marked with a Continued
Attack marker. During this Shock Phase these units
must Shock attack, no Charges or Counter-Charges
are allowed, otherwise it is resolved identically to 12.0. After all
Continued Attacks that resulted from the initial Shock Phase are
resolved, those marked Continued Attack –1, remove the Continued Attack markers from any units that did not earn another
Continued Attack result. If any unit that has a Continued Attack
marker on it obtains another Continued Attack result, increment
the Continued Attack marker (i.e., flip a Continued Attack –1 to
Continued Attack –2 or add another Continued Attack –1
marker to the unit) and conduct another Shock Phase for all of
those units still marked with Continued Attack markers. Continue this procedure until no unit is marked with a Continued
Attack marker.
When resolving a Continued Attack, subtract one (–1) from the
Resolution DR for each previous Attack undertaken by that unit in
that Activation, this will be denoted by the sum of the Continued
Attack markers on the unit.
PLAY NOTE: The DRM reflects the ongoing loss of formation
and impetus such attacks are subject to.
PLAY NOTE: There is no limit to the number of times a unit
can obtain a Continued Attack result. If you run out of Continued Attack markers, add some other marker to designate the
additional modifiers.

15.0 RALLYING UNITS
15.1 Rally
Disordered units may cure their Disorder status by spending their
entire Activation doing nothing. Flip the Disordered unit to its
normal side, if they are not adjacent to an enemy unit after all
combat has concluded and they have neither moved, changed
facing, fired missiles, attacked, or been attacked that Activation. Note: The unit may have started the Activation adjacent
to an enemy unit, but can still rally if there are no enemy units
adjacent after combat.
Retired units that are in or within one hex of their Standard may
be Rallied if that Standard is Activated; see 6.0. When Activated,
remove the Retired marker from every eligible unit and make
sure the units are in Disordered status.
Units may not Rally if adjacent to an enemy unit. Units may Rally
if within range of an enemy Missile unit or Out of Command.

15.2 Standards
The Standards of the armies were the rallying point
for units. Any unit that is Retired and is within one
hex of its Standard when the Standard is Activated has
its status changed from Retired to Disordered.
Standards may be Activated only in a Free Activation; they may
not be Activated by DR. A Standard is Activated instead of a
Command. When a Standard is Activated, the player may either
move the Standard (and just the Standard, not any units near it)
or Rally Retired units.
A Standard may be moved to any hex on the game-map. However, when doing so, any Retired units that are within 1 hex of
the Standard prior to its being moved must check to see what
effect this has on them. Roll one die; add the unit’s Disordered
Shock Defense DRM. If the adjusted DR is a ‘5’ or higher, that
Retired unit is now Eliminated.
Standards may be captured by the enemy, if an enemy combat
unit enters a hex occupied solely by the Standard. When a Command (or Army if there is only one Standard) loses its Standard,
Eliminate all currently Retired units; thereafter all Retired results
become Eliminated for that Command (or Army). Standards may
not Retreat Before Combat.

16.0 KNIGHTS AND OTHER
SPECIAL UNIT TYPES
16.1 Knights
Knights have special rules which reflect their aggressive (sometimes overly), independent spirit:
•	 Knights are never Out of Command, regardless where their
Command leader is, except for purposes of Charge Reaction
to enemy missile fire.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual
•	 No Charge Reluctance for Knights.
•	 Charge Reaction to Missile Fire is automatic, unless
restrained by their Command leader (see 13.9).
•	 Knights never Retire (see 14.4). Whenever a Knight suffers
a Retire result it is Retreated (14.3) instead.

16.2 Sudanese Archers
The Fatimid and Ayyubid Armies contained large
numbers of Sudanese (or Ethiopians; the names are
intermixed in the various sources …some sources call
them “azoparts”, an old word apparently derived from
a French word for Ethiopians. Now there’s a piece of worthless
trivia). The Sudanese were archers with a kick: they carried flails,
maces on chains, which they could swing with great effect. They
also knelt when firing.
The Sudanese Archers with Flails may fire as regular Archers.
Unlike regular Archers, they may also use (and defend, like other
Archers, against) Shock attack, using the AF column/row on the
Weapons Matrix. However,
•	 If they Fire when Activated, they may not Shock attack,
and vice versa.
•	 If they use Reaction Fire, they must defend against Shock
attacks against them in that Activation as Archers, not as
Archers with Flails.

16.3 Bedouin Pike Infantry Javelineers
The Bedouin Pike Infantry Javelineers may move,
throw their javelins and attack/defend as Pike Infantry
all in the same Activation. See the Javelineer row on
the Missile Fire/Range DRM Chart.

© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

15

16

17.0 Index
A

Infidel Rules Manual
Retreat Before Combat 9

S

B

Seizure/Seizing Continuity 3,  6
Sequence of Play 4,  18
Shock 3,  9
Stacking 7
Standard(s) 3,  14
Sudanese Archers 15

Bedouin Pike Infantry Javelineers 15

T

C

Terrain 6,  9, 10

Activation 3,  4,  5, 6
Advance After Combat 11
Angle of Attack 10
Angle of Fire 9

Charge 11
Charge Reluctance 12
Charisma 3,  5, 10
Combat Results 13
Command 3,  4
Command Range 3,  5
Continuation/Continuity 3,  5,  6
Continued Attack 14
Counter-Charge 12, 13

V
Victory 4
Victory Points 3

W
Weapon System Matrix 10

Z
Zone of Control 3,  7

D
Disordered 3,  13

E
Eliminated 14

F
Facing 7
Flight Points 3,  4
Free Activation 3

K
Knights 3,  11,  12,  13, 14

L
Leaders
Command leader 3,  4, 5
Leader Casualty Check 3,  5
Overall Commander 3,  4, 5
Presence (combat) 10
Replacement Leaders 5
Line Of Sight 9
Loss Check 3,  4

M
Missile Fire
Active Fire 8,  9
Reaction Fire 8, 9
Return Fire 8, 9
Movement 6, 7

O
Out of Command 5

R
Rally 14
Reinforcements 7
Retired 11, 13
Retreat 13
© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual

Example of Combat
This example begins after the movement phase of a Crusader Activation.
Norman KN 2 and Norman KN 3 moved during the Activation to reach
their respective hexes.

Shock Phase Step 1: Declaration of Attacks

Norman PK 1 will Shock attack Bedouin MC 1. Norman KN 1 will Charge
Bedouin MC 2. Norman MA 1 will attack Seljuk PK 1 and Seljuk PK
2. Norman KN 2 will Charge Seljuk PK 3. Norman KN 3 will Charge
Mamluk HC 3.
Note: Norman KN 1 could have charged Bedouin MC 1 and attacked
together with Norman PK 1, rather than Charging Bedouin MC 2. The
Knights would not have to attack Bedouin MC 2, as a Charge targets one
defender, per 13.2. This would prevent Bedouin MC 1 from Retreating
Before Combat (see 12.2) in Step 2. This attack would have been resolved
on the Charge table, as at least half of the attackers would be marked
with a Charge marker.

17

From the Weapons System Matrix, a MA attacking a PK has a +1 DRM.
The defender’s Shock Defense DRM is +1 (from the counter). The attacking
MA is at a strength disadvantage of 1:2, so a –1 DRM applies. No other
DRMs apply. Total DRM +1 +1 –1 = +1. The combat will be resolved on
the Shock Combat Results table using the Defending Unit’s Status Normal
column. The Crusader player rolls a 0 + 1 DRM for a total of 1, a result
of Attacker Disordered, Retreat 1 Hex.

Norman MA 1’s Attack on Seljuk PK 2

From the Weapons System Matrix, a MA attacking a PK has a +1 DRM.
The defender’s Shock Defense DRM is +1 (from the counter). The attacking
MA is at a strength disadvantage of 1:2, so a –1 DRM applies. No other
DRMs apply. Total DRM +1 +1 –1 = +1. The combat will be resolved on the
Shock Combat Results table using the Defending Unit’s Status Disordered
column. The Crusader player rolls a 6 + 1 DRM for a total of 7, a result
of Defender Retired. Seljuk PK 2 is placed near its Standard (see 14.4),
and the Fatimid Flight points are increased by 1 (see 3.0).
Combat results are now applied to Norman MA 1. From the attack on
Seljuk PK 1 it is flipped to its Disordered side, then it must Retreat 1 hex;
the Crusader player chooses hex 2521. There are no results from the attack
on Seljuk PK 2, as Advance After Combat only applies for cavalry without
a Continued Attack result. Even had Norman MA 1 been cavalry instead
of infantry, the Disordered result would have prevented it from Advancing. Had the Crusader player rolled a 7 during the attack on Seljuk PK 2,
the total would have been 8 resulting in a result of Defender Eliminated,
Continue Attack. In this case, the MA would first be Disordered, then would
be forced to advance into hex 2722, and finally marked with a Continued
Attack –1 marker.

Norman KN 2’s Attack on Seljuk PK 3

Shock Phase Step 2: Before Resolution

The counter for Norman KN 1 is placed adjacent to Bedouin MC 2 in hex
2620. The counter for Norman KN 2 is placed adjacent to Seljuk PK 3
in hex 2624. The counter for Norman KN 3 is place adjacent to Mamluk
HC 3 in hex 2625.
The Fatimid player decides that Bedouin MC 1 Retreats Before Combat,
the counter is placed in hex 2820. The Crusader player decides not to
advance Norman PK 1 into hex 2719. Mamluk HC 3 declares a CounterCharge (see 13.7) against Norman KN 3. Consulting the Counter-Charge
vs Cavalry Charge table, the HC’s Shock Defense DRM (–1) is added to a
die roll to determine the effectiveness of the Counter-Charge. The Fatimid
player rolls a 2 –1 DRM = 1. The Mamluk HC’s Counter-Charge is successful and Norman KN 3’s Charge marker is replaced with a Shock marker.

Shock Phase Step 3: Attack Resolution

The Crusader player decides to resolve his attacks in order from left to
right. Since all combat is simultaneous the order of resolution only matters
for advance and retreat decisions.

From the Weapons System Matrix, a KN attacking a PK has a +2 DRM. The
defender’s Shock Defense DRM is +1 (from the counter). The KN moved
in the Activation prior to Charging –1 DRM. No other DRMs apply. Total
DRM +2 +1 –1 = +2. The combat will be resolved on the Charge Combat
Results table using the Defending Unit’s Status Disordered column. The
Crusader player rolls a 3 + 2 DRM for a total of 5, a result of Defender
Eliminated, Continue Attack. Seljuk PK3 is removed from the map, the
Fatimid Flight points are increased by 1 (see 3.0), Norman KN 2 advances
into hex 2723, and is marked with a Continued Attack –1 marker.

Norman KN 3’s Attack on Mamluk HC 3

From the Weapons System Matrix, a KN attacking a HC has a +1 DRM.
The defender’s Shock Defense DRM is –1 (from the counter). No other
DRMs apply. Total DRM +1 –1 = 0. The combat will be resolved on the
Shock Combat Results table using the Defending Unit’s Status Normal
column. The Crusader player rolls a 3 +0 DRM for a total of 3, a result
of Attacker Disordered. Norman KN 3 is flipped to its Disordered side.

Shock Phase Step 4: Continued Attack resolution

All units marked with a Continued Attack marker must now begin again
at Shock Phase Step 1, declaring attacks against all enemy units in their
Frontal hexes (see 14.6). In this example, only Norman KN 1 has an enemy
in its Frontal hexes. It declares a Shock attack targeting Bedouin MC 1.
As Norman KN 2 will not attack, its Continued Attack marker is removed.

Norman KN 1’s Attack on Bedouin MC 2

From the Weapons System Matrix, a KN attacking a MC has a +2 DRM.
The defender’s Shock Defense DRM is +1 (from the counter). No other
DRMs apply. Total DRM +2 +1 = +3. The combat will be resolved on the
Charge Combat Results table using the Defending Unit’s Status Disordered
column. The Crusader player rolls a 3 + 3 DRM for a total of 6, a result of
Defender Eliminated, Continue Attack. Bedouin MC 2 is removed from the
map, the Fatimid Flight Points are increased by 2 (see 3.0), Norman KN 1
advances into hex 2720, and is marked with a Continued Attack –1 marker.

Norman MA 1’s Attack on Seljuk PK 1
This attack and the attack on Seljuk PK 2 must both be resolved before
applying results to the attacker.
© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

Infidel Rules Manual

18

Infidel Extended Sequence of Play
A.	 Activation Phase: Choose a Command (6.1), Standard (15.2), or Pass.
•	 If a Standard is Activated skip to Phase D or move the Standard (15.2).
•	 Place any replacement leaders (5.6) at the end of the Activation Phase.

B.	 Move/Fire Phase: Move (7.0) and/or Fire (11.0) with any or all of the units and leaders in the Activated Command.
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Before moving any units check Command status for all Activated units.
A mounted missile unit may fire at any point during its move.
A foot missile unit may fire only at the end of its move.
A unit may fire without moving.
Each unit or leader must finish its movement/firing before another unit may begin to move/fire.
The Non-Active player’s units may qualify for Reaction/Return fire (11.2) or Counter-Charge (13.6) depending on the
Active player’s actions.

C.	 Shock Phase: After all movement/firing for the activated Command is complete, Shock combat (12.0) and
Charges (13.0) may be initiated.
1.	 The Active Player designates which of his units are attacking which defending units, including Charges.
2.	 One at a time, the Active player moves each Charging unit adjacent to its target. Any Reaction fire caused by this
move is resolved. If required, the Charging unit makes a Charge Reluctance roll. Any Retreat Before Combat by
the defender is resolved at this time. The defender attempts any Counter-Charges of which he is capable.
3.	 The Active player resolves all his Shock and Charge attacks, in any order he wishes. The Charge table is used as
long as at least half of the units in an individual attack succeeded in Charging (not Disordered by Reaction fire,
not Reluctant, not Counter-Charged), otherwise the Shock Table is used. Advances are taken and Continued Attack
markers are placed.
Play Note: Attacks by a single attacker against multiple defenders are resolved at the same time, and they are
considered to be going on simultaneously, with results (which can be cumulative) applied after both attacks are
resolved.
4.	 All Continued Attacks are now resolved. Begin again at Step 1, except that only units marked with Continued
Attack markers Shock and they must Shock; Charging and Counter-Charging are not allowed.

D.	 Rally Phase: During the Activation of a Command, Rally (15.0) any Disordered units that did nothing for the
entire Activation and that are currently not adjacent to an enemy unit. If a Standard was Activated, Rally (15.0) any
Retired unit within one hex of the Activated Standard.
E.	 Continuation Phase: If the completed Activation was a Free Activation, both players make a Loss Check (3.0).
If the game does not end due to Loss Check, Pass or choose to Continue with a Command.
•	 This cannot be the Command that just Activated, unless the Active Player has only one Command.
•	 The Non-Active player may attempt to Seize Continuity (6.3). If so, he chooses one of his leaders to Activate and rolls the
die adding any modifiers and compares it to his leader’s Activation Rating. If successful, he Activates that Command and
proceeds from Phase B. If not, the Active player gets a Free Activation, proceed to Phase A, this Free Activation may even
be used to Activate the Command that just completed Activation.
•	 If no Seizure attempt occurs, roll the die adding any modifiers and compare it to the chosen leader’s Activation Rating. If
successful, Activate that Command and proceed from Phase B. If not, the Non-Active player gets a Free Activation and
proceeds to Phase A.

GMT Games, LLC
P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
www.GMTGames.com
© 2011 GMT Games, LLC Living Rules Version 1.2 05/11/2013

