Isle of Skye: From Chieftain to King
Goal
The game is played over 6 rounds (or 5 rounds in a 5P game). After final scoring, the player with
the most VP is the winner, and becomes King of Skye.
Setup
1. Place the game board in the middle of the table. Check the lower right icon to check it is
the right side up for the player count (2-4 P or 5P).
2. Shuffle the 16 scoring tiles and draw 4. Place one on each of the spaces A-D, face up.
Return the remaining 12 tiles to the box.
3. Place the round marker on the left-most bowl of the round track.
4. Place the coins in a stack in supply.
5. Each player chooses a colour and takes in their colour (R, Y, G, B) (returning any unneeded
components to the box):
a. Player screen – Place in front of yourself
b. Landscape tile with a castle – Place face up in front of yourself in front of the
screen.
c. Score token – All players place them on the 0 space of the scoring track
d. Discard marker (axe) – Place behind the screen.
6. The youngest player is the start player and takes the starting player token (piper).
7. Place the landscape tiles in the cloth bag and shuffle thoroughly.
Course of Play
The game ends after 6 rounds (or 5 rounds in 5P game). Each round is performed in the following
6 phases:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Income
Draw tiles and set prices
Discard a tile
Buy a tile
Build
End of Round and Scoring

After the final round, there is a final scoring.
Phase 1: Income
Each player receives 5 gold (from your castle), plus 1 gold for each barrel of whisky that is
connected via road to their castle.
From Round 3 onwards, gold is also awarded dependent on position on the scoring track. Each
player receives the amount of gold indicated for the round on the game board multiplied by the
number of other players that are ahead of them on the scoring track.
Phase 2: Draw Tiles and Set Prices
Each player draws 3 landscape tiles from the cloth bag, and places them face up in a row in front
of their screen. Then simultaneously, all players assign either gold or their discard marker to the
tiles (keeping them hidden behind the screen). The two tiles without the discard marker must be
assigned at least 1 gold each. All remaining gold that is not assigned is kept secret. When all
players have finished assigning gold/markers, all screens are removed simultaneously.

Phase 3: Discard a Tile
Each player puts the tile they marked with their discard marker back into the cloth bag. Then the
tiles in the bag is shuffled.
Phase 4: Buy a Tile
Beginning with the starting player, each player in clockwise order can buy exactly 1 tile from
another player. To do so, the buying player pays an amount of gold from their remaining personal
supply equal to the assigned value of the tile they wish to buy. They take the tile and place it next
to their play area for now. The seller receives this gold, and also takes the gold assigned to the
tile, placing this gold into their personal supply.
If you cannot or do not want to buy a tile, you must pass. After all players have bought a tile or
passed, each player automatically buys any remaining tiles in your display, returning the gold to
the general supply.
Phase 5: Build
All players must now add the tiles they purchased to their clan territory, following these rules:




Each tile being added must share at least 1 edge with an existing tile in your territory.
Each edge being shared must match in terrain type (pasture, mountain, water), however
roads do not need to be continued. Scrolls and Barrels do not block roads.
If a tile cannot be placed according to these rules, it is returned to the cloth bag.

NB – Some scoring tiles award VP for completed (fully enclosed by other terrain types) areas. Roads
do not enclose or subdivide areas like they do in Carcassonne.
Phase 6: End of Round and Scoring
All players receive VP according to the scoring tile(s) of the current round. Check the ribbons
under the current round bowl to see which scoring tiles are applied to the current round. Each
tile is assessed independently of the others. Players advance their scoring markers 1 space for
each VP scored. A player must have at least 1 of the required feature to qualify for any scoring. In
the case of a tie, each tied player receives 5 VP and the 2 VP is not awarded.
After scoring, the first player token is passed clockwise to the next player. The new starting player
advances the round marker 1 space. After the final round there is also final scoring.
End of the Game and Final Scoring
At the end of the game, each player receives VP from each Scroll tiles they placed in their territory.
Identical scrolls both score. If a scroll is in a completed (fully enclosed) area, you receive double
the VP for it.








1 VP/ 2 Sheep
1 VP / 2 tiles showing Whisky
1 VP / 2 Ships
1 VP / Cattle
1 VP / Broch (white tower)
1 VP / Farm
1 VP / Lighthouse

Each player finally exchanges his gold at the rate of 1 VP per 5 gold. The player with the most VP
is the winner. Leftover gold (after VP exchange) breaks ties.

Appendix: The Scoring Tiles
Tile

Effect
2 VPs for each square of 4 Landscape Tiles.
Landscape tiles can be part of multiple
squares. An easy way to conduct scoring this is
to count the number of “+” intersections
completely surrounded by 4 tiles.
1 VP for each sheep in the clan territory.

Tile

Effect
1 VP for each completed area in your clan
territory.

3 VPs for each completed area of at least 3
landscape tiles in your clan territory.

1/3/6 VPs for each mountain area in the clan
territory with 1/2/3 Brochs (towers).

5 VPs for each set of broch, farm and lighthouse
in the clan territory.
Each building can only be part of 1 set.

5 VPs for the player with the most tiles with
barrels of whisky in their clan territory, and
2 VPs for the player with the second most
tiles with barrels of whisky.
In the case of a tie for first place, each tied
player receives the full 5 VPs, and the 2 VPs are
not awarded.
In the case of a tie for second place, each tied
player receives 2 VPs.
You must have a minimum of 1 barrel of whisky
in your clan territory to receive VPs from this
scoring tile.
The whisky barrels just need to be in your clan
territory, they don’t have to connect by road to
your castle to score here.
1 VP for each sheep and each cattle that is
orthogonally or diagonally adjacent to a farm
in your clan territory. Also, 1 VP for each
sheep and each cattle that is on a tile
containing a farm.
The sheep or cattle does not have to be on the
same terrain as the farm – it will still score.
Each sheep or cattle can only score 1 VP
irrespective of the number of farms that it is on
or adjacent to.
2 VP for each cattle that is connected to the
castle via roads.
The road connected to the castle must run
through the tile the Cattle is on.

5 VPs for the player with the most ships in their
clan territory, and 2 VPs for the player with the
second most ships.
In the case of a tie for first place, each tied player
receives the full 5 VPs, and the 2 VPs are not
awarded.
In the case of a tie for second place, each tied player
receives 2 VPs.
You must have a minimum of 1 ship in your clan
territory to receive VPs from this scoring tile.

1 VP for each tile in the clan territory that is
connected to the castle via roads.
The road connected to the castle must run
through a tile to connect it.
2 VPs for each landscape tile in your largest
completed water area.

5 VPs for the player with the most gold, and 2
VPs for the player with the second most gold.
In the case of a tie for first place, each tied player
receives the full 5 VPs, and the 2 VPs are not
awarded.
In the case of a tie for second place, each tied player
receives 2 VPs.
You must have a minimum of 1 gold in your clan
territory to receive VPs from this scoring tile.
3 VPs for each water area in the clan territory
with at least 1 ship and at least 1 lighthouse.
The lighthouse is technically on the shore of the
water area.
Do not score multiple times for more than 1 set in
a water area.
3 VPs for each vertical line of at least 3
contiguous landscape tiles in your clan
territory.
Vertical is relative to your starting castle.
Each column can only score once.
2 VPs for each completed mountain area in
your clan territory.
Any texture on mountains is for flavour only, only
the borders matter for defining a mountain area.

