A game for 1 to 4 players

RULEBOOK
Kanban (the Japanese word for bilboard) is the name for a scheduling system that supports
an efficient assembly line, just-in-time production, and a smooth workflow process.
Electric Vehicles (EVs) have become more common since 2014.
EVs are the future of the automobile industry. They are superior
vehicles due to being more efficient, easier to maintain, cleaner,
and are cheaper to run. They are computerized machines
that use AI to improve safety and in the near future will
provide autonomous driving. They receive software upgrades
during their lifetime and are constantly improving, unlike their
traditional combustion engine counter parts, which start to
become obsolete as soon as you start using them.
Over the course of the game, players take on the role of rookie
employees, trying to secure their career. You need to manage
suppliers and supplies, improve and innovate automobile
parts, and get your hands greasy on the assembly line in order
to boost production and impress the factory manager.

You must make shrewd use of the recycling facilities and the
limited factory supplies in order to appropriate parts when
the suppliers come up short. Because the factory must run
at optimum efficiency, production doesn’t wait for you, or for
mistakes to be rectified.
Kanban is a game that focuses on resource and time
management that puts you in the driver’s seat of an entire
production facility, racing for factory goals and the highest level
of promotion. You will earn Production Points (PP) for performing
various actions in the game, and the player with the most PP at
the end of the game is declared the winner.
Sandra, the factory manager, will review your performance and
keep the factory on tempo.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Components
Game Setup

3
4

Player Setup

6

Advanced training
Golden Rules

9
9

G aining Books, Parts Vouchers,

Task: Receive Parts Voucher

New Employee Orientation 7

and Banked Shifts

9

Game Structure

Generic Speech tokens

9

7

1. Department Selection

7

Departments and Tasks

10

2. Working Phase

8

Design Department

10

Training and Certifications
Homework

8
9

Logistics Department
Task: Collect Car parts

Task: Select a Design
10
Task: Select an Advanced Design 10

Assembly Department
Task: Provide a Needed Part
R&D Department
Task: Claim Cars
Task: Upgrade a Design
Administration Department

11
11

Factory Goals
16
Sandra: The Factory Manager 17

11

End-of-Week Scoring

12

Meetings

Scoring Per formance Goals 20

14

End of Meetings
End of the game

21

14
16

Variants and 2/3-Player Rules
Final Scoring

22
24

Many thanks to all playtesters: Alexandre Bezerra, Alexandre Garcia, Álvaro
Santos, António Lobo Ramos, André Pereira, António Vale, Becca Morse,
Carla Pereira, Carlos Ferreira, Carlos Tomás, Carolina Valença, Chris Zinsli,
Cristina Antunes, Cyril Santos, Daciano Resende, Elsa Romão, Emanuel Santos, Filipe Nunes, Firmino Martinez, Gonçalo Moura, Inês Lacerda, Inês Santos,
Inês Cantoneiro, João Pedro Luís, João Pinto, João Madeira, João Monteiro,
João Tereso, João Silva, José Almeida, José Carlos Santos, José Luís, José Luís
Gama, Lucinda da Fonseca, Luís Evangelista, Luís Costa, Marco Chiappa,
Mónica Meireles, Mónica Silvério, Nuno Silva, Nuno Cordeiro, Paul Grogan,
Paula Cunha, Paulo Duque, Paulo Renato, Pedro Branco, Pedro Chuva, Pedro Freitas, Pedro Sampaio, Pedro Silva, Rafael Duarte, Rafael Pires, Rodrigo
Dias, Ruben Rodrigues, Rui Malhado, Rui Barata, Rui Barreiro, Sandra Sarmento, Sandrina Fernandes, Sérgio Martins, Sérgio Neves, Sgrovi, Sílvio Carvalho,
Sofia Passinhas, Stephen M. Buonocore, Stephen Rogers, Susanne Zinsli, Tiago
Duarte, Vasco Chita, Vitor Pires and Grupos de Lisboa, Leiria, Aveiro, Porto,
the Columbus Area Boardgaming Society, and Arcádia Lusitana.

Game Art: Ian O’Toole

A huge thank you to: Bruno Valério, Catarina Lacerda, Christopher Incao, David Dagoma, Duarte Conceição, Hélio Andrade, Hugo Elias, João Palmeira,
Jorge Graça, Nathan Morse, Paul M. Incao, Paulo Lacerda, Pedro Almeida,
Ricardo Almeida, Ricardo Gama. These guys played all versions of this game
undetermined times. Without all of these people this game would not have
been possible.

FOLLOW us on Twitter: @EagleGryphon

Graphic Design & 3D Illustrations: Ian O’Toole
Rulebook & 3D Illustrations: Vital Lacerda
Solo Game: David Turczi
English Rules Writing: Paul Grogan, Vital Lacerda
English Rules Editing: Paul Grogan
Official Rules Video: Gaming Rules!
Proofreading: Ori Avtalion
Project Managers: Randal Lloyd, Rick Soued

For support, email us at: customer-service@eagle-gryphon.com
LIKE us on Facebook: www.facebook.com/Eagle-Gryphon-Games

© 2020 Eagle-Gryphon Games, 801 Commerce Drive, building #5.
Leitchfield, KY 42754, All Rights Reserved.
www.eagle-gryphon.com

20

14

CREDITS

All my love to my beautiful daughters Catarina and Inês and to my muse
and greatest friend, my wife Sandra for all their ideas, patience, support, and
inspiration.

19

12

“So, you’re what I’ve been sent to work with. Hmph. I am Sandra, the factory manager and you will be answering
to me for as long as you remain employed here. Due to your… substandard… education, I expect you to take
advantage of the company on-the-job training, so you can become competent with each department’s
operations. I will be checking on your progress in a different department each day. You don’t want to be the one
who hasn’t done your homework — and you’d better not let your other responsibilities slip, either. Such infractions
will be recorded in your permanent record. Think of it as a little incentive.” — Sandra

2

19

COMPONENTS

1 Game board

Rulebook and Reference
book

4 Player boards

24 discs (6 per player color)

4 Worker meeples
(1 per player color)

Upgraded

locked

4 Certification markers
(1 per player color)

4 Banked Shift markers
(1 per player color)

4 Double-Upgrade tiles
(1 per player)

20 player Locks (5 per player)

4 Player aid sheets
(1 per player)

20 Speech tokens
(5 per player color)

23 Generic Speech tokens

1 Sandra meeple
1 Week marker

1 Production Cycle marker
1 Meeting marker

1 Sandra reference tile

60 Car parts (10 per type)

16 Book tokens
11 Parts Voucher tokens

Concept, Sports, Truck,

Double
Upgrade
Side

Front
SUV and City

1 two-sided Test Track Overlay
1 Pace Car

40 Cars (8 per type)

e tile

pac

s
Lock

Lock

6 Car Part Value markers

e tile

spac

design

Back

Back

Front

Front

20 Basic Garage Bonus tiles
(5 per player color)

20 Expert Garage Bonus tiles
(5 per player color)

upgraded
design

12 Kanban Order cards

32 Performance Goal cards

35 Design tiles
(7 each in 5 different Models)

3

12 Factory Goal tiles in 3 groups

5 Demand tiles

20 Award tiles

9 Final Goal tiles

4 Banked Shift Reminder
tokens (1 per player)

GAME SETUP
1.	 Place the Game board in the middle of
the table.

Note: All components
are limited.

2.	 Place the Sandra
Reference tile in the
appropriate space. Use
the side with the red
stripe.

1
6

3.	 P
 lace the Car parts next to the Game
board in a supply. Choose 3 different
types at random and place them in the
appropriate spaces in Recycling.

3

5C

9
8

4.	 Put the Parts Vouchers and Books next to
the Game board in a supply.
5.	 Separate the Factory Goals into 3 stacks
depending on their type. From each stack,
choose 2 Factory Goals at random.
Place the Certification
Goals face up in the
5A
matching numbered
spaces above the
Certification Track (5A).
Place the others face
up on the appropriate
spaces of the Game
board with the lower5B
numbered one on
the top space and
the other one on the
bottom (5B/5C). Return
the unused Factory
Goals to the box.
Then, place 2 Generic
Speech tokens on each
5C
Factory Goal (a total of
12 Speech tokens).
3 -players: P
 lace 2 Generic Speech tokens
on the Factory Goal with the
lower number of each pair;
Place 1 on the Factory Goal
with the higher number.
2 -players: P
 lace 1 Generic Speech token
on each Factory Goal.

7
5B

11

10

4

5A

5A

3
These are the setup rules for a 4-player game. Changes for a 2- and 3- player game
are noted where appropriate .

RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT SETUP:
6.	 3-players: Cover the Test Track
printed on the Game board
with the Test Track Overlay
depicting 3 people.
2 -players: As per 3-players,
but use the side depicting 2
people.
7.	 Place the Car Part Value markers on the
leftmost space of the Upgrade Value track.

4

8.	 Place the Pace Car in either of the shaded
spaces on the track, facing counterclockwise.
9.	 Place the Meeting marker and the
Production Cycle marker on the indicated
spaces.

DESIGN SETUP:
10.	Shuffle the Design tiles and place 1 at
random, blueprint-side up, in each of the
rightmost 8 spaces.
11.	Place the rest of the Design tiles face up in
three stacks of 9 tiles each on the leftmost
spaces. The leftmost stack is the Central
stack and the other two stacks are known
as First Office stacks.

ASSEMBLY SETUP:
12.	Place 1 Car of each color in the matching
color spaces, facing left.
13.	Place another Car of the same color on
the yellow plate to the left of each Car
just placed.
14.	Put all other Cars next to the Game board
near the Assembly department so that
all players can clearly see the number of
each remaining.

ADMINISTRATION SETUP:
18.	Shuffle the Per formance Goal cards and
place 4 at random face up on the spaces
of the Meeting room. Place the rest of the
Per formance Goals face down in a deck
next to the Game board.

16
2

19.	Choose a Final Goal tile at random and
place it in the appropriate space at the
bottom of the room. Return all other Final
Goal tiles to the box.

15

13

12

14

15

21.	Place Sandra at her desk.

FOR EACH DEPARTMENT:

17

22.	Shuffle the Award tiles
and randomly place
3 face down above
the top space of the
training track in each
department. Put the
remaining Award tiles
back in the box.
2-3 players: P
 lace only 2 Award tiles per
department.

23
22
18

21

20.	Place the Week marker on space 0 of the
Week track.

20

19

23.	Place 1 Generic Speech
token on top of each of
the Award tiles stacks.

CAR PARTS
Motor, Autopilot System, Battery.

Body, Electronics, Drivetrain.

LOGISTICS SETUP:
15.	Shuffle the 5 Demand tiles and place 1
at random in each of the 2 spaces near
the end of the line. Place a number of
Generic Speech tokens next to each tile as
indicated.
16.	Place the remaining Demand tiles face
down in a stack next to the Game board
near the Assembly department.

17.	Shuffle the Kanban Order cards and
place them face down next to the Game
board. Reveal the top card of the deck
and place the depicted 6 Car parts in the
corresponding warehouse spaces. Then,
place the card face down on the bottom
of the deck.

DEPARTMENT NAMES AND SYMBOLS
RESEARCH &
DEVELOPMENT
(R&D)

ASSEMBLY

LOGISTICS
DESIGN
ADMIN

5

a.
a.

g.

c.
i.

f.

b.

d.
h.
e.

PLAYER SETUP
c.

Each player per forms the following steps:
a.	C hoose a color and take a matching Player board, Basic Garage Bonus tiles, Worker
meeple, Speech tokens, Banked Shift Reminder token, Shift Bank marker, discs and
Certification marker in that color.
b.	P lace 1 of your Speech tokens in a slot on your Player board and the rest of them next to
your Player board.
c.	P lace your Basic Garage Bonus tiles face up on your garages. The order does not matter
except for the one depicting a padlock which must be placed on your rightmost garage.
d.	Place a Double-Upgrade tile on the appropriate space on your Player board.

d.

e.	P lace a Lock on each of the 5 lock symbols printed on your Player board and on the
Double-Upgrade tile.
f.	 Take a Parts Voucher token and place it on the appropriate space on your Player board.
g.	Draw 3 Per formance Goal cards into your hand.
h.	Draw 2 Kanban Order cards into your hand.
i.	 Take a Banked Shift Reminder token and place it next your player board.
j.	 Place 1 of your discs on the starting space of each of the 5 department training tracks.
k.	 Place your Banked Shift marker on the 0 space of the Shift Bank.
l.	 P
 lace your PP marker (your last disc) on space 15 of the Production Points (PP) track. Every
time you gain PP move your marker forward in this track. If you lose PP move it backwards.

j.

6

k.

l.

NEW EMPLOYEE ORIENTATION
After setup, but before the game begins,
per form the following steps:
1.	 C hoose a start player at random.
Beginning with that player and in
clockwise order, each player places
their Certification marker on an
empty space in the 0 section of the
Certification Track. When you place your
Certification marker on a space with
a depicted benefit, you immediately
receive that benefit.
Note: The order of the markers from right to left is important for the next step but is also turn order
for the first round of the game.
2.	 In Certification track order (from right to
left), each player takes 1 Car Part from
Logistics and 1 Design tile from Design.

1

Any face-up Design can be taken,
including one from the top of one of
the stacks. Place each taken item in the
appropriate space on your Player board.
Note: During the game, taking a Design from the
rightmost 4 spaces gives you a benefit. That
does not apply to this step.
3.	 A fter all players have taken a tile, refill
the empty Design spaces by sliding tiles
to the right in order to fill the gaps and
then filling any spaces that are still empty
with tiles from the corresponding stack
(top First Office stack for the top row;
bottom First Office stack for the bottom
row). Do not replenish the Car parts.

Choose a space.

2

Blue goes first, Orange last.

The game is played over a series of rounds
with each round representing one day of
work in the factory. Each day comprises two
phases:
1.	 D epartment Selection Phase: Players
take turns choosing a workstation in a
department in which they want to work.
2.	 Work Phase: In department order,
players use their Shifts to work and/
or train in the department they chose.
After the end of the Work Phase, before
the End of the day, there may be a
Meeting.
This process continues until there has been a
certain number of Weeks and Meetings and
after final scoring, the player with the most PP
is declared the winner.

Take 1 Design and 1 Car Part.

3

Place them on your board.

GAME STRUCTURE

Get the benefit.

After all players have taken
a tile, refill the display.

Logistics and Design
Departments worktsations.

1

1. DEPARTMENT SELECTION PHASE
In the first day of the game, each player
in Certification Track order (from right to
left) chooses an empty workstation in any
department and places their Worker meeple
on the space, standing upright. Sandra is
already at her desk in Administration.
In subsequent rounds, each player, in order
from top to bottom, selects a different
department to the one they are currently in
and then places their Worker meeple on an
empty workstation in that department. So
the choice you make in one day affects your
priority for choosing in the next day.

Orange has 3 shifts to work
in Assembly
Orange is the first player;
Purple is second;
Yellow is third;

1
“Company cross-training policy disallows employees from working in the
same department for two consecutive work days.” — Sandra

Important: In a 2-player game, players cannot move to a department when Sandra
is in it. This is true even for Administration.

Sandra also chooses a new workstation according to her own specific rules,
described on page 17.

Blue is the last player-

2

3

7

4

Sandra at her desk

2. WORKING PHASE
In order of the Worker meeples from top
to bottom, each player takes a turn to
complete tasks. The number of Shifts you
have to complete tasks is determined by
the workstation you chose (2 or 3 in all
departments except for Administration, where
it is 1 or 2). Also, if you have any Banked Shifts,
you may spend some of those (by moving your
marker back on the Shift Bank track) in order to
work more; however you are never allowed to
work a total of more than 4 Shifts in one day.
Blue has 2 Shifts to spend in the Design department.

Most tasks can be completed in a single
Shift; however, a few take several Shifts to
complete.

Once you have completed
your Shifts, lay your Worker
meeple down at its
workstation to indicate that
your turn is over.
When it is Sandra’s turn, she evaluates the
department she is in and completes her tasks
(see page 18). The exception to this is the first
day of the game where Sandra is at her desk,
dealing with paperwork.
After all players have worked their Shifts,
check to see if there is a Meeting or if it is
the end of the week, and then the next day
begins.

EXAMPLE
Blu e is w o rk ing in t he Design Dep a rt ment and has 2 Shi fts to compl ete tas ks . She al s o
ha s 3 Shift s b a nk ed, so she c o u ld sp end u p to 2 of thos e to wor k more. She choos es to
sp end 1 Ba nk ed Shift a nd w o rk 3 t o t a l S hifts that d ay .
Blue spends 1 Banked Shift.

TRAINING AND CERTIFICATIONS
Before explaining how each individual
department works, there is something in
common to all of them.

Orange spends a shift in training and becomes certified.

Each department has its own training track
which indicates the current training level of
each player. When you work in a department,
one of the tasks you can do is to undergo
training in that department. For each Shift
you spend on this task, move your marker to
the next space, placing it on top of any other
markers already there.
Once you cross the arrow on a training track
of a department, you are considered to be
certified in that department. This usually
unlocks something on your Player board and
gives some benefit within the department itself
(described in the rules of each department).

Each time you become certified in a
department, per form the following steps:
1.	 D iscard the Lock from the corresponding
section of your Player board (see
Reference book).
2.	 C hoose an empty space in the next
section of the Certification Track
to where your Certification marker
currently is, move your marker to it, and
gain the benefit of that space.
3.	 C heck to see if you have achieved a
Factory Goal (see page 16).

EXAMPLE

8
Orange moves from section 0 to section 1 and gains a
Parts Voucher.

Ora nge ha s ju st ga ined her first c ert ific a t ion. Yel l ow got hi s fi r s t cer ti fi cati on ear l i er i n
t he da y, so o ne o f t he sp a c es in t he nex t s ecti on has al read y been chos en. Or ange
c ho o ses t he sp a c e dep ic t ing a P a rt s Vo u cher, pl aces her Cer ti fi cati on mar ker there
a nd ga ins 1 P a rt s Vo u c her.

HOMEWORK
When working in a department, you
can also train by reading books on
your own time, even if you didn’t
spend any Shifts training.

On your turn, when working in a department,
before or after spending your shifts, you
may return 1 or more Books to the supply to
move your marker one space forward on that
department’s training track per Book used.
This does not cost any Shifts and it can be
done even if you have already spent all your
Shifts for the day.

ADVANCED TRAINING
Even after you are certified in a
department, you may continue
to train until you reach the final
space on the track when you
are classed as an Expert in that
department. The first player
to become an Expert in each department
gains the Generic Speech token on top of the
Award stack.
Also, when you become an Expert, secretly
look through all of the remaining Award tiles in
that department, choose one and return the
rest face down back to the space where they
came from.

Purple returns to the supply 2 books from his player board
to train twice more.

Award tiles give you an immediate benefit
and are then placed back in the box (see
Reference book for benefits).
All players reaching the final space can
choose one Award tile if there are still any
available.
At the end of the game, you will gain PP
based on your relative position on each
training track. Final scoring is explained on
page 21.

EXAMPLE
Pu rpl e i s w o rk i ng in t he D e s ig n d e p a r t m ent a nd ha s a t o t a l o f 3 S hift s t o sp end. H e
de c i de s t o spe nd 2 S hif t s c om p le t ing t h e t a sk s o f t ha t dep a rt ment a nd t hen 1 S hift
trai n i n g. He t h e n a ls o u s e s 2 B ook s t o t r a in t w ic e mo re.

Since he was the first to reach the Expert space, Purple
gains the Generic Speech token. Then he chooses 1
Award tile from those available. and receives its benefit.

GOLDEN RULES
GAINING BOOKS, PARTS VOUCHERS,
AND BANKED SHIFTS

GENERIC SPEECH
TOKENS

During the game, there are a number of
ways in which you can gain Books and Parts
Vouchers.

During the game, there are
a number of ways you can
gain a Generic Speech
token.

Whenever you gain either of these, place the
appropriate tiles to the side of your Player
board; you cannot use them on the turn that
you gained them. At the end of your turn,
move them onto your Player board.
There are also a number of ways of gaining
Banked Shifts. When you gain a Banked Shift,
move your marker up the Shift Bank. Like
Books and Parts Vouchers, these cannot be
used on the turn that you gain them.
Use your Banked Shift Reminder
token if you need to remember
how many shifts you had at the
beginning of the turn.

Each time you do, return the Generic Speech
token to the supply and move one of your
Speech tokens from the side of your Player
board onto an empty space of your Player
board. If all of the spaces on your Player
board are already filled, place the Generic
Speech token to the side of your Player
board instead (you will be able to exchange
them for your own Speech tokens after each
Meeting; see page 19).

Yellow gains a Generic Speech token. He returns the
Generic token, and places one speech token of his color
in an empty space of his Player board.
If Yellow didn’t have any free spaces, he would keep the
Generic Speech token next to his Player board.

9

DEPARTMENTS AND TASKS

DESIGN DEPARTMENT
Designs are created here which can then be used in R&D to upgrade specific parts and to move Cars into your garage for testing.
Other than training, there is only one
other task that can be completed in this
department: Select a Design.
This task moves a Design from the Design
department to your Player board. You will
need Designs to complete tasks in the
Research & Development department.

TASK: SELECT A DESIGN
To take a Design to your Player
board, spend 1 Shift and
per form the following steps:

Orange is not allowed to take any designs from the 3 leftmost stacks. For that she needs to be certified and take
the Select an Advanced Design task.

1.	 C hoose one of the
rightmost 8 spaces
spent. The Designs
Central stacks are
task.

Designs on the
for each Shift you
in the First Office and
not available with this

2.	 M ove the chosen Design to one of the
available spaces of your desk on your
Player board, keeping it blueprint-side
up. If you do not have an empty space,
you cannot take the Design.

Orange places the 3 designs in the proper places of
her Player board. Only one design can be held in each
space.

WELL-RESEARCHED DESIGNS
If you take a Design
from one of the
rightmost four
spaces, you gain the
benefit shown between the two designs of
that column. This is either 1 Banked Shift, or 1
Book. If you take the four Designs from those
spaces you gain 2 Banked Shifts and 2 Books.
Remember that any benefits you gain cannot
be used in the same turn.

Ora nge sp ends 3 S hift s t o t a k e 3 Designs. She takes the ones s hown i n the s econd
ima ge a t left , a nd p la c es t hem o n her P lay er board . T hen, the Des i gns i n the Des i gn
dep a rt ment a re slid t o t he right t o refill gaps and the empty s paces refi l l ed .

Being certified in this department gives you
two benefits:
•	 Y
 ou can store 1 additional Design on
your Player board.
•	 You may complete a new task:
At the end of her turn Orange slides all Designs to the right
and fill the empty spaces with new ones from the stacks.

Note: Y
 ou only refill Designs at the end of your turn,
after you have selected all the designs you
want to.

Example:

CERTIFICATION
BENEFITS

10

After you have finished spending your Shifts
here, slide all Designs in both rows to the right
to fill any gaps. Then, in each row, refill any
spaces still empty (from right to left) with tiles
from the First Office stack to the left of the
respective row for each empty space. If the
relevant First Office stack is depleted, refill
empty spaces with Designs from the Central
stack. If both are depleted, fill the top row first.

TASK: SELECT
AN ADVANCED DESIGN
This task works the same way as the normal
‘Select a Design’ task, except you can
select the top Designs from the Central
stack and from the stacks in the First Office.
If you take the last Design from a stack in
the First Office, immediately replace it with
the one from the top of the Central stack.

LOGISTICS DEPARTMENT
Stock the warehouses with a Kanban order, and collect the Car parts you need.
Other than training, there are three other tasks
that can be completed in this department.
These tasks are related to acquiring Car parts
which you will use in Assembly and in R&D.

TASK: ISSUE
KANBAN ORDER
To complete this task, spend 1
Shift and per form the following
steps in order:
1.	 G ain 1 Banked Shift. Remember, any
Banked Shifts gained cannot be used in
the same turn.
2.	 C hoose a Kanban Order card from your
hand and place it on the Kanban space
vertically such that 4 of its symbols are
on one side of the line, and 2 are on the
other. You choose whether the top or
the bottom gets the 4 symbols. Kanban
cards can be rotated 180 degrees.
3.	 F or each symbol that matches a
warehouse on its side of the line, add 1
Car Part from the general supply to the
appropriate warehouse.
4.	 R eturn the Kanban Order card face
down to the bottom of the deck.

TASK: COLLECT
CAR PARTS
To complete this task, spend 1
Shift, take any number of Car
parts from any one warehouse
and place them on storage spaces on your
Player board. You must have an available
space on your Player board for each Car Part
you take.

A Parts Voucher can be used
to acquire any one Part from
the supply that you need, but
only at the moment you need
it. It can be used only when
completing the tasks Provide
a Needed Part in Assembly
or Upgrade a Design in R&D,
as specified in the rules for
these tasks. You cannot return
a Parts Voucher and place
a Car Part from the supply
on your Player board. You
cannot use a Parts Voucher to
acquire a Car Part that is not
currently present in the supply.

The Autopilot System warehouse does not match with its
side of the card. 2 Batteries, 1 Electronics, 1 Body and 1
Drivetrain were added-

Blue spends 1 Shift to take all Batteries from the warehouse
and places them on her Player board.

5.	 D raw the top card from the Kanban
Order deck into your hand.
Note: You can only complete this task once per
turn.

CERTIFICATION
BENEFITS
Being certified in this department gives you
two benefits:
•	 Y
 ou can store 1 additional Car Part on
your Player board.
•	 You may complete a new task:

TASK: RECEIVE
PARTS VOUCHER
To complete this task, you must be certified in
this department. Spend 1 Shift to take 1 Parts
Voucher from the supply and place it next to
your Player board. At the end of your turn,
move the Parts Voucher to your Player board.
Note: You can only complete this task once per
turn.

11
Blue spends 1 Shift, gains one Voucher and places it on
her player board, She would like to take another one but
one per player is available per player per turn.

ASSEMBLY DEPARTMENT
Provide the parts needed to complete the assembly of Cars and watch them roll down the line!
The Assembly line is made up of Assembly
spaces to hold the Car parts and conveyors
that move the Cars down the line as they are
built. Eventually, they roll out to the Test Track
in the R&D department.

FIRST: CLEAN OUT ASSEMBLY SPACES
Before starting spending Shifts in the Assembly line, Purple
cleans the City Cars line because it’s filled with Car parts.

At the start of your turn in
this department (or when
choosing to work here from
Administration), if a Model
has all of its Assembly spaces
full of Car parts, return all of
those Car parts to the supply.
Models which have Car parts on only some
Assembly spaces are unaffected.
Other than training, there is only one
other task that can be completed in this
department.

RECYCLING
Purple cannot place the Body because one is already
in the City Car line. He can’t place an Autopilot System
either, because he needs to provide the upgraded parts
first. In this case his only option would be an Electronics.

A

At any time during your turn, you may
exchange a Car Part from your storage
with one in the Recycling pool. There can
only ever be 3 Car parts in the Recycling
pool and each one must be different. The
use of Recycling is free and can be done
as many times as you want during your
turn. However, Recycling cannot be used
during Meetings.

Example:

B

12

By providing a unique Electronics to the Sports Car line,
Purple creates a chain of movements.

Yello w sp ends 1 S hift
w hen w o rk ing in t he
Lo gist ic s dep a rt ment
t o t a k e 3 Bo dy
Ca r p a rt s fro m a
w a reho u se. Think ing
a hea d t o his nex t
t u r n, he rea liz es he
w ill need a Driv et ra in.
H e do esn’ t ha v e
o ne, b u t t here is
o ne in Rec yc ling. H e
ex c ha nges o ne o f
his Bo dy Ca r p a rt s
fo r t he Driv et ra in in
Rec yc ling.

TASK: PROVIDE
A NEEDED PART
To complete this task, spend
1 Shift and per form the
following steps in order:
1.	 M ove a Car Part from your Player board
to an empty Assembly space for any
Model.
•	 Instead of using a Car Part from your
Player board, you can spend a Parts
Voucher. If you do, take any Car Part
from the supply and place it on an
empty Assembly space.
•	 T he Car Part must differ from any
others currently in the Model’s
Assembly Spaces. Reminder: You can
use Recycling.
•	 If the Model has had any of its Car
parts upgraded (see R&D on page 14),
you must provide Upgraded parts for
a Model first. You can only provide a
non-upgraded Part once all upgraded
parts have been provided. The exact
order of parts does not matter, only
that a Model must have all of the
upgraded parts added before any
non-upgraded parts.
2.	 M ove the Car at the top of this Model’s
assembly line one position along the
arrows.
•	 W
 hen the position it is moving to is
occupied by another Car, that other
Car is displaced along the path
following the arrows to the next yellow
plate or off the conveyor.
•	 If there are multiple paths, you can
choose freely. This continues until no
further Cars are displaced. See next
page if a Car moves off the end of a
conveyor.
3.	 P lace a new Car of this Model from the
supply at the beginning of this Model’s
assembly line. Skip this step if there are
no more Cars of the Model in the supply.

Important: T he Cars move on the Assembly line
each time one Part is added, not
just when all the Assembly spaces
are full.

CAR MOVED OFF
THE END OF A
CONVEYOR
When a Car moves off
the end of a conveyor, it
rolls onto the Test Track
in R&D. Per form the following steps:
•	 G
 ain 1 or 2 PP, depending on which
conveyor delivered the Car.
•	 If the Car Model matches the one
depicted on either of the Demand
tiles, take a Generic Speech token
from next to the Demand tile, if there
are any left.

FULFILLED DEMAND
At the end of your turn, if either of the
Demand tiles in this department have no
more Speech tokens next to them, the
current demand has been met. Set the empty
Demand tile to one side and draw a new
one from the stack of Demand tiles, placing
a number of Generic Speech tokens next to
it as indicated on the tile. After replacing
the empty Demand tile(s), shuffle the tiles set
aside back into the stack.
Purple provides a Drivetrain pushing all the City Cars down
the line. A new City Car enters in the beginning of line.

•	 M ove the Car to end of the line of Cars
behind the Pace Car on the Test Track.
There can only be a maximum of 4 Cars
behind the Pace Car at any one time. If a 5th
Car were to enter the Test Track, remove the
Car directly behind the Pace Car, advance
the other Cars to close the gaps behind it and
then place the new Car at the back. Return
the removed Car to the supply.

Place 2 Generic Speech tokens at the side of the tile.

Example:
Pu rpl e spe n ds 2 S hif t s wor k ing in A s s e m b ly a nd u ses b o t h o f t hem t o p ro v ide needed
part s. He f i rst c hoos e s t o a d d a P a r t t o t he Cit y Ca r (green Mo del), w hic h c u rrent ly ha s
no u pgrade d c om p one nt s , s o he is f re e t o a dd w hic hev er Ca r P a rt he w a nt s w it h t he
ex c e pt i o n o f the B od y whic h ha s a lre a dy b een a dded. H e c ho o ses t o a dd a Driv et ra in,
mo vi n g t h e C a r P a r t f rom his P la ye r b oard t o o ne o f t he emp t y Assemb ly sp a c es o f t he
Ci t y C ar.

Purple needs a Battery or an Autopilot.
So he uses Recycling to exchange one of his Parts.

Thi s mo ve s th e g re e n C a r a long t he c on v eyo r, a nd he p u shes t he o t hers a s sho w n in
the i m age . To f inis h t he t a s k , a not he r g reen Ca r is a dded t o t he st a rt o f t he c o nv eyo r.
Sec o n d, h e w a nt s t o a d d a P a r t t o t he Co nc ep t Ca r (b la c k Mo del). Chec k ing t he
upgrade d c o m p one nt s in R & D , t he B a t t ery a nd Au t o p ilo t S yst em ha v e a lrea dy b een
upgrade d. Th e re f ore , b ot h of t he s e p a r t s mu st b e a dded b efo re a dding a ny no nupgrade d part s . Unf or t u na t e ly, he d oe sn’ t ha v e eit her o f t hese p a rt s himself, b u t t here
i s a B atte ry i n R e c yc ling . H e e x c ha ng e s his Driv et ra in fo r t he Ba t t ery in Rec yc ling a nd
the n u se s th at t o a s s e m b le a C a r.
The bl ac k Car is m ov e d a long t he c onv eyo r, p u shing t he o t hers a s sho w n. This c a u ses
the gre e n Car t o roll of f t he c onv e yor a nd o nt o t he Test Tra c k .

By placing the Battery in the Concept Car line, Purple
manages to move the City Car out of the line and scores
2 PP. The Car is ready to be tested.

CERTIFICATION
BENEFITS
Being certified in Assembly unlocks the
5th garage space on your player board.
Although this garage is unlocked by being
certified in Assembly, you only gain the
benefit of it when you park a Car in there
which is Part of the next department to be
explained...

13
Since City Cars was in Demand, Purple gains one Generic
Speech token. Then he moves the Car to the Test Track.

RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
Claim Cars from the Test Track and park them in your garage for final testing, and/or upgrade Car parts of the various models.
Other than training, two other tasks can be
completed in this department. Claiming a
Car requires there to be a Car on the Test
Track that matches one of your Designs, and
upgrading a Part requires you to have both a
suitable Design and a matching Car Part.

TASK: CLAIM CARS

Purple sends a City Car Design and a Truck Design to the
bottom of the Central deck, spends 3 shifts and claims
both Cars.

To claim a Car, you must have
a Design on your desk that
matches a Car on the Test
Track. To complete this task,
per form the following steps:
1.	 C hoose which Cars you want to claim
from the Test Track. For each Car you
want to claim, return a matching Design
(one that depicts the Model of the
Car you want to take) from your Player
board to the bottom of the Central
stack. You must also have an empty
garage on your Player board for each
Car you want to take.
2.	 S pend the appropriate number of Shifts to
take the Cars from behind the Pace Car.
•	T he 1st Car behind the Pace Car
requires 1 Shift.
•	The 2nd Car: 2 Shifts
•	The 3rd Car: 2 Shifts.
•	The 4th Car: 3 Shifts.

Purple places each of the Cars in one of his garages,
gains the bonuses depicted, and then flips the Garage
tiles over.

3.	 P lace each Car in any empty garage
on your Player board, flip the Garage
tile next to it, and receive the benefit
depicted on each garage you filled
(see Reference book).
4.	 C heck to see if you have achieved a
Factory goal (see page 16).
5.	 A fter you have finished claiming Cars,
advance the Pace Car a number of
spaces along the Test Track equal to the
number of Cars you took. If the Pace
Car reaches or crosses a shaded space,
move the Meeting marker to the proper
space in the Administration Department.
This indicates that there will be a board
Meeting at the end of the current day
(see page 20). Then advance the other
Cars to close the gaps behind it.

14
Purple advances the Pace Car 2 spaces along the track.
It reaches the shaded space, so a Meeting will take place
at the end of the day.

Note: You only advance the Pace Car at the end of
your turn, after you have claimed all the Cars
you want to.

Note: T o speed up the game, and because choosing a garage may take some time, it is recommended to keep your claimed Car(s) next
to your Player board until the end of your turn.
Only then proceed with the last 2 steps and
place the Cars in your garages.

TASK: UPGRADE
A DESIGN
To complete this task, you
must have a Design on your
Player board depicting
both the Model you wish to
upgrade and the Part you are upgrading, as
well as the Car Part itself.
Spend 1 Shift and per form the following steps:
1.	 M ove the Car Part you are using
from your Player board to any empty
Upgrade space for the Model you are
upgrading. Instead of using one of your
own Car parts, you can spend a Parts
Voucher to take any Car Part from the
supply and place that on the Upgrade
space. Remember: You can also use
Recycling.
2.	 R eceive the benefit depicted in the
Upgrade space you filled (if any is
depicted).
3.	 O n the Upgrade Value track, move the
marker for the Car Part you used one
space to the right (if able). (The first
upgrade moves it into the first space.)
4.	 F lip the Design you used face down to
show the Upgraded Design and place it
to the right of your Player board.
5.	 E arn 2 PP (indicated on the Upgraded
Design side of the tile).
6.	 C heck to see if you have achieved a
Factory goal (see page 16).

Note: E
 ach Model of Car has one Design tile for
each Car Part, plus one Design tile which
does not feature a Part, and cannot be used
to upgrade.

TESTED DESIGNS
Any Upgraded Designs you have, for which
you also have a matching Car in one or
more of your garages is considered to be
a Tested Design. When you have a Design
that is Tested (which could be immediately
after upgrading it, or immediately after
claiming a Car), move it from the side of
your Player board to above your Player
board, directly above a matching Car.

Example:
Blu e ha s 3 U p gra ded Designs, o ne
fro m t he SU V, o ne fro m a S p o rt s Ca r
a nd a no t her fro m a Co nc ep t Ca r. She
o nly ha s a SU V a nd a S p o rt s Ca r in
her ga ra ges. H er S U V a nd S p o rt s Ca r
U p gra ded Designs a re c o nsidered t o
b e Test ed Designs.

Blue, wants to upgrade the Body from her SUV and the
Electronics Part from a Truck.

Tested Designs score you PP at the End of
each week (see page 19) and at the End of
the game (see page 21).
Note: If you have more than one matching Car,
it doesn’t matter which the upgraded
Design is above. The fact that the Design
is above your player board indicates that
it is Tested. You can have more than one
Tested Design above each Car.

CERTIFICATION
BENEFITS

Example:

Once you are certified in this department,
remove the lock from your Double-Upgrade
tile on your Player board. You now have
a one-time ability to double-upgrade
a Design whenever you complete the
Upgrade a Design task.
When you do this, take the fowling steps:
1.	 Increase the Car Part’s value by 2
steps instead of just 1 (if able) and flip
it to the Double-Upgrade side.
2.	 G ain PP equal to the new value of the
Car Part.
3.	 F lip your Double-Upgrade tile in your
player board.
Note: Each type of Car Part can only be double-upgraded once during the game.
I.e. No two players can double-upgrade
the same Part.

1

Blue moves the SUV and the Sports Car above
the Cars garages. The Concept Car Design is not
Tested, so she keeps it next to her Player board.

To get the right parts, she exchanges her Autopilot with a
Body from Recycling, and discards a Parts Voucher for the
other Part.

2

Blue is certified in R&D and is about to
complete the task: Upgrade a Design.
Since the value of the Car Part she
wants to use is already high, this is a
good time to do this.
The Design she wants to use is the
Drivetrain from her SUV. Blue doesn’t
currently have a Drivetrain and there
isn’t one in Recycling. However, she
does have a Parts Voucher, so she
retur ns this to the supply and places a
Drivetrain from the supply on an empty
Upgrade space of the SUV.

She places the parts in the respective Models upgrade spaces, gaining1 Book and 2 PP.
She then advances each of the related Value
markers one space to the right.

She flip s t he Do u b le-U p gra de t ile t o
u se t he Do u b le-U p gra de a b ilit y. The
v a lu e o f t he Driv et ra in inc rea ses fro m
3 t o 5 (t w o st ep s inst ea d o f o ne). She
flip s t he Va lu e ma rk er a nd sc o res 5 P P.
Then, she sc o res 2 P P fo r her Design
t ile.

3

15
Blue scores 2 PP for each tile. Since only the Body is
Tested, she moves it the top of the SUV garage and
the Electronics to the side of her Player board.

ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT
From here, you can micromanage another department.
When you work in Administration, you may
also choose one other department to work in.
You can split your Shifts and books however
you like between Administration and the
chosen department: Only in Administration, or
only in the chosen department, or in both.

Since there is no specific task in Administration,
Shifts worked here can only be used for
training.
Note: T he Workstation spaces in Administration only
offer 1–2 Shifts, instead of the usual 2–3 Shifts;
however, this makes it a good place to use
those Shifts you’ve stored up in the Shift Bank.

Example:
Yellow spends 2 shifts from the Shift bank, plus 1 more from
Administration to work 3 shifts in Logistics.

Yello w is a t t he Wo rk st a t io n t ha t giv es 2 Shi fts , but he s pend s 2 Shi fts from the
S hift Ba nk t o w o rk a t o t a l o f 4 S hift s o n t his tur n. He al s o has 3 books . He choos es
Lo gist ic s a s his o t her dep a rt ment a nd deci d es to s pend 3 Shi fts wor ki ng i n Logi s ti cs
a nd his rema ining S hift t o t ra in in Administr ati on. T hen he s pend s 2 Books to tr ai n i n
Administ ra t io n a nd t he 3 rd b o o k t o t ra in in Logi s ti cs .

CERTIFICATION
BENEFITS

Yellow also spends 2 Books to train in Administration and 1
more to train in Logistics..

Becoming certified in Administration
allows you to have 1 additional
Speech token on your Player board.

FACTORY GOALS
During setup, three pairs of Factory Goal
tiles were placed in the departments of the
factory where the board of directors want to
see some improvement:
•	 Claiming Cars for final testing in R&D
•	 Upgrading Designs in R&D

16

•	 Certifications
Yellow gains his 3rd Certification and thus meets the
requirements of the Certification Factory goal. He gets
one of the Speech tokens on the goal.

When a player meets the requirements of a
goal, they immediately take 1 of the Generic
Speech tokens from its tile. Once all Speech
tokens have been removed from a goal,
remove it from the board and place it back

in the box. It is possible for the same player to
achieve both goals within a department.

THE REQUIREMENT OF THE GOALS
ARE AS FOLLOWS:
•	 C laiming Cars: Have the indicated
number of Cars in your garages.
•	 U pgrading Designs: Have the indicated
number of Upgraded Designs.
•	 C ertifications: Have the indicated
number of Certifications.

SANDRA, THE FACTORY MANAGER
I’m responsible for the factory production and I’m here to evaluate your performance.
Like the other players, Sandra participates
in the Select Workstation and Work Phases,
following special rules:
In the first day of the game, Sandra is at her
desk in Administration doing paperwork; she
will per form no tasks that day. At the start
of each subsequent days, during the Select
Workstation Phase, Sandra takes her turn at
selecting a new department in the normal
order. Therefore, at the start of day 2, she will
be the last to move.

When she moves, she is placed on the next
empty Workstation of the next department
going from top to bottom. If all of the
Workstations in the next department are
full, she skips that department and moves
to the next one instead, and so on. When
moving to Administration, Sandra ignores
the Workstations and sits at her desk. On the
day after reaching her desk, she starts again
moving through the departments from top to
bottom.

Example:
A t th e st art o f d a y 2 , Wor k e r m e e p le s are lying do w n in Wo rk st a t io n Alley a nd S a ndra
i s at h e r de sk . Ea c h p la ye r in ord e r s e lec t s a new Wo rk st a t io n t o w o rk in, a nd t hen
Sa n dra c h o o se s la s t . B ot h of t he Wor k s t a t io ns in R& D a re o c c u p ied, so she is p la c ed o n
the u ppe r m o st Wor k s t a t ion in A s s e m b ly.

Both R&D Workstations are occupied. Sandra moves to
the next available Workstation from top to bottom.

Example:
A t th e st art o f d a y 3 , t he p la ye r s in R & D first c ho o se a new dep a rt ment t o w o rk in,
fo l l o w e d by S a nd r a , a nd t he n t he ot her p la yers. I f Ora nge a nd P u rp le b o t h c ho o se t o
w o rk i n D e si gn on d a y 3 , S a nd r a will m ov e t o t he emp t y Wo rk st a t io n in Design.
Orange and Purple play first, and both move to Logistics. Sandra plays next, and again moves to the next
available Workstation from top to bottom.

EVALUATION
From day 2 onwards, when it is Sandra’s turn
to act during Phase 2, she evaluates the
department she is currently in. She evaluates
the player or players who have the least
training in the department she is in.

If you are evaluated, check the criteria for
penalty on the table you can find in the next
page. If you meet this criteria, you lose 1 PP,
plus another 1 PP for each Banked Shift you
have fewer than 5.

Example:
Sa n dra i s e val u a t ing t he D e s ig n d e p a r t ment . P u rp le, Blu e, a nd Yello w a re t he eq u a l
l o w e st o n th e t r a ining t r a c k a nd a re a ll su b jec t t o ev a lu a t io n. Blu e ha s 4 Designs in her
de sk s an d pass e s e v a lua t ion wit hout p ena lt y. P u rp le ho w ev er o nly ha s 1 Design in his
de sk s an d i s pena liz e d . H e only ha s 2 S hift s b a nk ed a nd t herefo re lo ses a t o t a l o f 4 P P
( 1 + 5 − 2) . Ye l l ow ha s no D e s ig ns in his desk s a nd is a lso p ena liz ed. H o w ev er, he ha s 4
B an k e d S h i ft s, s o los e s 2 P P.

Purple, Blue, and Yellow are all tied on the lowest space
of the bottom track .

17

Criteria for Penalty

Penalty

Departmental Task

DEPARTMENT

CRITERIA FOR PENALTY

Research &
Development

Have 2 or fewer Upgraded Designs

Assembly

Have 2 or fewer Cars in your garages

Logistics

Have 2 or fewer Car parts on your Player board

Design

Have 2 or fewer Designs on your Player board

Administration

Be certified in 2 or fewer departments

DEPARTMENTAL TASK
Blue, has 4 Designs. He does not get any penalty.

After evaluating the department she is in, Sandra per forms a specific task in that department.
Remember, Sandra does not per form her Departmental Task on day 1 of the game.

DEPARTMENT

Yellow has no Designs but he has 4 Shift banked. He loses
2 OP. (1 + 5 - 4) = 2 PP

18

Purple has only 1 Design, so he gets a penalty. He has 2
Shifts banked. He loses 4 OP. (1 + 5 - 2) = 4 PP

DEPARTMENTAL TASK

Research &
Development

Advance the Pace Car 1 space. Advance
all Cars behind it up to fill the gap. If the
Pace Car moves onto a shaded space, this
triggers a Meeting.

Assembly

Remove Car parts from all Assembly
spaces.

Logistics

Remove all but 1 Car Part from each
warehouse.

Design

Shuffle and return the rightmost 4 Design
tiles to the bottom of the Central stack. In
a 2-player game, remove the rightmost 8
tiles instead. Then, slide the Designs down
to fill any gaps as normal.

Administration

Per form End-of-Week Scoring.

END-OF-WEEK SCORING
When Sandra per forms her Departmental Task
in Administration, the week comes to an end
and all players score PP as follows:
•	 For each Car in your garage:
•	 G
 ain 1 PP for each upgrade that has
been made to that Model (by all
players). To do this, count the number of
Car parts on the Upgrade spaces of the
Model.

•	 G
 ain 1 PP for each Tested Design you
have of that Model.
•	 T hen, advance the
Week marker by 1
space unless it is
already on position
3 (in that case just
ignore this step).

Example:
O ran ge h as 3 C it y C a r s a nd 1 S p or t s C a r in her ga ra ges. The Cit y Mo del ha s b een
upgrade d 3 ti m e s , a nd s he ha s 2 Te s t e d Designs fo r t he Cit y Mo del. Therefo re, ea c h o f
he r C i t y C ars w or t h 5 P P, 1 5 P P in t ot a l.
The S po rts Car ha s only b e e n u p g r a d e d o nc e, a nd no t b y her, so it is o nly w o rt h 1 P P.

Orange Scores 3 + 2 PP from her City Car Upgrades.
Because she has 3 City Cars, she scores those 5 PP
3 times, gaining 15 PP.

MEETINGS
Once we have enough test data, it’s time for
everyone to meet in the Meeting room and
discuss our findings. This is time for you to show
off your accomplishments to Sandra.
As mentioned earlier,
when the Pace Car
reaches or passes a
shaded space, move
the Meeting marker
to the Meeting space
in Administration. At
the end of that Work
phase, after everyone has taken their turns
(including Sandra), the Meeting begins.

Note: Recycling cannot be used during a Meeting.
At the Meeting, you will use your Speech
tokens to discuss Per formance goals and earn
PP.

Remember, there are several ways you can
get Speech tokens:
1.	 B
 eing the first person to reach the last
space on a Training track.

She didn’t upgrade any Part on her Sports Car. She gains
the number of upgrades made by other players. 1 PP.

2.	 R
 eaching the 2nd and 4th sections of
the Certification track.
3.	 Accomplishing Factory Goals.
4.	 C
 ompleting assembly of a Car that is
in Demand.
5.	 P
 arking a Car in a garage that rewards
you with a Speech token.
At the start of the Meeting, there are 4
Per formance Goals on the table. Each player
also has 3 in hand, of which 1 (and only 1)
must be played during the Meeting.

The 4 Performance Goals at the beginning of the Meeting.

A Meeting is resolved with players taking
individual turns in Certification track order
(from right to left). Once all players have taken
a turn, the process starts again, following
the same order. If a player passes (see Pass
in the next page), they can still take further
turns in the Meeting, but when all players pass
consecutively, the Meeting is over.

19

Example:
A t th e i mage i n t he r ig ht , p la ye r s t a k e t u r ns du ring t his Meet ing in t he fo llo w ing o rder:
llow B lu e , a nd t he n b a c k t o P u rp le, a nd so o n.
Purpl e , O ran ge , Ye llow,

Meeting Order is determined by players position in the
certification Track.

On your turn you must choose one of the
following two options:
A) Speak. Per form the following steps:
1.	 You may play 1 of your Per formance
Goals from your hand face up to the
table near the Meeting room.
Note: You must do this once and only once per
Meeting at some point before you pass.

Blue places one Speech token in the 3x. She can score
2PP per Car until a maximum of 3 Cars. Since she has
more than 3 Cars, she scores 6 PP.

2.	 P lace 1 of your Speech tokens on the
highest-numbered empty speech icon of
a Performance Goal of your choice that
you don’t already have a Speech token
on. You are allowed to place a Speech
token onto the Performance Goal you just
played in step 1.

Note: When you play your performance Goal, if you
choose to place a speech token you must
place it on that goal.
3.	 Score PP based on the goal (see below).

OR
Blue play one of her Performance Goals. She decided not
to place a speech token on it. From now on she is allowed
to Pass.

B) Pass. Y
 ou can only pass if you have already
played one of your Performance Goals.
Remember, you can still take Part
in the Meeting on a later turn in the

same Meeting.
Important notes on Per formance Goals:
•	 Y
 ou must play 1 of your Per formance
goals from your hand at each Meeting,
even if you will not score any PP for it.
•	 Y
 ou are not required to play a Speech
token on your own played Per formance
Goal.
•	 Y
 ou may place a Speech token on a
Per formance Goal, even if it will score
you 0 PP.

SCORING PERFORMANCE GOALS
Sandra is very keen on the Per formance Goals
but grows less interested in them the more she
hears about it.
The number of Speech icons on a Goal
indicate the number of players who can
speak about that Goal at the Meeting. Each
Per formance Goal depicts a number of PP at
the bottom, as well as a multiplier inside each
speech icon.
When you place a Speech token on a card,
you score the PP depicted for each time you
meet that goal, up to a maximum number
of times as the multiplier shown on the icon
where you placed the Speech token.

Example 1:
P u rp le is ex c it ed t o b ra g a b o u t t he 5 U p grad ed Des i gns he has , but the hi ghes t
mu lt ip lier is 3 ×, so Sa ndra o nly c a res a b o ut 3 of them. He pl aces a Speech token on
t he c a rd a nd sc o res 6 P P (3 U p gra ded Des i gns , 2 PP each). Or ange pl anned real l y
p o o rly fo r t his Meet ing, a nd t his is t he o nly Per for mance G oal wor th any thi ng to her.
S he p la c es a Sp eec h t o k en o n t he sp a c e wi th the 2 mul ti pl i er, but s i nce s he onl y has
1 U p gra ded Design, she sc o res 2 P P (1 Desi gn, 2 PP each). If s he had 2 or more, s he
w o u ld ha v e sc o red 4 P P. This mo v e a nno ys the Yel l ow pl ay er who has 3 Upgr ad ed
Designs, b u t b ec a u se S a ndra is no w get t ing ti red of hear i ng about i t, the onl y s pace
left is 1 ×. Desp it e ha v ing 3 U p gra ded Desig ns , he can onl y s core 1 of them. So Yel l ow
dec ides t o sc o re a no t her go a l. Blu e ha s 1 Des i gn, s he wants to take the oppor tuni ty ,
a nd p la c es a S p eec h t o k en o n t he c a rd t o s core 2 PP.
Purple have 5 Designs, but he can only score 3. He places
a Speech token on the 3x Performance Goal and scores 6
PP (3 x 2 PP per Design).

20
Orange only have 1 Design. She places a Speech token
on the 2x Performance Goal, and scores 2 PP (1 x 2 PP per
Design). She could Score 2 Designs if she had them.

Yellow only have 1 Design. But since the Design goal would
give him only 2 PP, he decides to score the
Certification in Assembly Performance Goal and gains 4 PP.

Blue has 1 Design and takes the opportunity. She Scores
2 PP.

Example 2:
In a l at e r t u r n , t he re a re no P e r f or m a nc e Go a ls left t ha t int erest Blu e, so she p la ys
he r o w n Pe r fo r m a nc e Goa l f rom he r hand a nd p la c es a Sp eec h t o k en o n it . P u rp le
i s f o c u se d o n a not he r P e r f or m a nc e G oa l t ha t w ill giv e him go o d P P, a nd p la c es a
Sp e e c h to k e n on it . O r a ng e is s t ill ir r it a t ed t ha t t hey didn’ t p la n w ell fo r t his Meet ing,
an d i s fe d u p w it h ot he r p la ye r s s c or ing so ma ny P P. Seeing t ha t P u rp le w o u ld b e a b le
to sc o re a l o t of P P f rom t he P e r f or m a nc e Go a l p la yed b y Blu e, Ora nge p la c es a
Sp e e c h to k e n on t ha t P e r f or m a nc e Go a l fo r 0 P P, in o rder t o redu c e t he nu mb er o f P P
Pu rpl e c an sc ore .
Si nc e B l u e c an P a s s t he ne x t R ound s , s he w ill w a it fo r new sc o ring o p p o rt u nit ies fro m
the o t h e r pl ay e r s ’ P e r f or m a nc e Goa ls .

Blue can pass and wait for the performance Goals played
by the other players. Orange scores 0 PP from Blue’s Performance Goal.

3x multiplier: Score up to 3 Designs in
your desk.
Subject to be scored.
2x multiplier: Score up to 2 Designs in
your desk.
1x multiplier: Score 0 or 1 Designs in
your desk.

Each Scored Design worth 2 PP.

END OF THE MEETING
Once everyone passes consecutively, per form
the following steps:
1.	 R eturn Speech tokens used during the
Meeting back to the respective players,
placing them to the side of their Player
boards. Unused Speech tokens (ones
remaining on your Player board) are not
moved.
2.	 E ach player with any Generic Speech
tokens by the side of their Player board
may return those tokens to the supply.
For each token they return, they move
one of their own Speech tokens from the
side of their Player board onto an empty
slot on their Player board.
3.	 D iscard all remaining face-up
Per formance Goal cards.

4.	 D etermine the next Meeting’s
Per formance Goals:
a.		E ach player places 1 of their 2
remaining cards from their hand
face down on an empty space in the
Meeting room.

Meeting marker is returned to the Test track. Production
Cycle marker advances.

b.		Reveal all the cards played.
c.		If there are fewer than 4 players, fill the
rest of the spaces with cards from the
deck.
5.	 E ach player draws 2 new Per formance
Goals from the deck and adds them to
their hand.
6.	 R eturn the Meeting marker to the Test
Track.
7.	 A dvance the Production Cycle marker
one space unless it is already in position 3.

After placing one card from their hand in the Meeting
room, players refill their hand to 3 Performance Cards.

END OF THE GAME
The Production Cycle marker and Week
marker track the end of the game. When one
of them is at least on the 2nd space and the
other is at least on the 3rd, the end of the
game is triggered. Finish the day, including
a possible End-of-Week Scoring, Meeting, or
both, and then proceed to Final Scoring. (See
back page of the rulebook).

Note: It is possible for there to be more than 3
Meetings before 2 Weeks have passed, and
vice-versa. The Meeting is always at the end
of the day.

21

The Meeting is just finished. The game is immediately over
because the Meeting just finished the day.

VARIANT 1

VARIANTS
VARIANT 1 - NICE SANDRA
Sandra is in a much better mood. Instead of
punishing you for not being a good worker, she
rewards you for doing well!
Criteria for Penalty

Reward

During Setup, place your PP marker on position
0 of the track instead of position 15. Also, use
the other side of the Sandra Reference tile.
When Sandra evaluates a department, she
evaluates the player or players who have the
most training in that department instead of
the players with the least training.
If you are evaluated, check the table below.
If you meet the requirements listed, you gain
1 PP for each Banked Shift you have over 5.

Orange and Purple, both gain 2 PP.

E.g. If you have 7 Banked Shifts, you gain 2 PP.

VARIANT 2

Departmental Task

DEPARTMENT

CRITERIA FOR PENALTY

Research &
Development

Have 2 or more Upgraded Designs

Assembly

Have 2 or more Cars in your garages

Logistics

Have 2 or more Car parts on your Player board

Design

Have 2 or more Designs on your Player board

Administration

Be certified in 2 or more departments

Blue must place her Car in the left most empty Garage.

VARIANT 3

Purple have experience with the game, the others player
don’t. Purple decides to play with the Expert tiles to make
his game a bit more challenging.

VARIANT 4

VARIANT 2 - T HE PLANNER

VARIANT 4 - DELAYED TUNNING

Place your 5 Garage Bonus tiles in any order
that you want. During the game, however,
when you Claim a Car, it must be placed in
your leftmost empty garage.

In this variant, you keep all the 4 leftmost
Garage Bonus tiles next to your board. Only
the 5th tile is placed in the rightmost space.
When placing a Car in one of your garages,
you choose one of 4 tiles and place it in the
space of the garage of the Car you just took.
You can gain the bonus at any time on a
future turn by flipping the tile over. You cannot
flip the tile in the same day you earned it. This
means 2 days before use them.

VARIANT 3 - EXPERT TUNNING
22
Yellow chose to place the Garage tile that gains him 2
Books. But he needs to wait for the next day to flip the tile
and gets them. This means 2 days before he can use them.

During setup, use the Expert
Garage tiles instead of using
the Basic Garage tiles. Note
that you could have some
players using Basic Garage
tiles and others using Expert
Garage tiles (if experienced
players are playing with a new player).

Because of this delay, Cars gain at the
last day of the game will not give you any
benefits.
Note: You are free to mix variants.

3-PLAYER RULES
REMINDER
Make the following changes to
the setup:
•	 C over the Test Track printed on the
Game board with the Test Track Overlay
showing the side with 3 Cars.
•	 F actory Goals: Place only 1 Generic
Speech token on the harder goal of
each pair, for a total of 9 Speech tokens
on Factory Goals.
•	 Training Awards: Place only 2 Award tiles
on the last space of each department’s
Training Track.
•	 A
 t the end of a Meeting, draw 1
Per formance Goal from the deck to
make the 4th Per formance Goal for the
next Meeting.

2-PLAYER RULES
REMINDER
Make the following changes to
the setup:
•	 C over the Test Track printed on the
Game board with the Test Track Overlay
showing the side with 2 Cars.
•	 F actory Goals: Place only 1 Generic
Speech token on each Factory Goal, for
a total of 6 Speech tokens on Factory
Goals.
•	 Training Awards: Place only 2 Award tiles
on the last space of each department’s
Training Track.
•	 A
 t the end of a Meeting, draw 2
Per formance Goals from the deck to
make the 3rd and 4th Per formance
Goals for the next Meeting.
•	 R
 ule change: Players cannot move to a
department where Sandra is. However,
she can move to a department where
a player is. This is even true in the
Administration Department.
•	 R
 ule change: When Sandra is in the
Design department, she removes the 8
rightmost tiles instead of 4.

RULES CHANGES
FROM PREVIOUS
EDITIONS
If you are already familiar with Kanban:
Automotive Revolution or Driver’s Edition, here
are the changes to the rules in this edition:
•	 Y
 ou may no longer replace Cars in your
garages with new ones.
•	 W hen Sandra penalizes you, you now
lose 1 PP in addition to PP for any
Banked Shifts that you have below 5.
•	 In the Nice Sandra variant, you are only
rewarded PP for Banked Shifts you have
over 5, instead of for all of your Banked
Shifts.
•	 T here are 5 new Final Goal tiles to
choose from during Setup.

SANDRA TIPS:
•	 K
 eep an eye on Sandra’s next move
and plan accordingly.
•	 R
 emember that if Sandra skips a
department, the game is one day
shorter. This movement may end the
game suddenly!
•	 A
 void penalties from evaluation. Try not
to be in the last position on the training
track and keep plenty of Banked Shifts if
you are.
•	 S ometimes is ok to lose some PP to keep
your strategy.
•	 W
 atch what Designs your opponents
take, they may use them to claim a Car
that you want!
•	 T ested Designs are valuable. If you are
investing in Designs of a certain Model,
don’t leave it to the last minute to
claim the Car you need to test those
upgrades.
•	 D
 on’t be afraid of using the Workstations
with fewer Shifts. These allow you to
take your turn before a player on the
other Workstation.
•	 U se Banked Shifts to maximize your turn.
•	 In Logistics, try to take at least 1
Car Part that you may exchange at
Recycling. 1 type gives you access to
the other 3.
•	 V
 isiting Administration is the only way
to work in the same department on
consecutive turns.
•	 If you lose your pace, visiting the
Administration is the best way to
recover.
•	 K
 eep one eye on the Factory Goals.
Those extra Speech tokens are very
useful.
•	 A
 ssemble Cars that are in Demand to
grant you Speech tokens.
•	 R
 emember the Per formance Goals and
collect as many Speech tokens as you
can. You can score a lot of PP in the
meetings.
•	 W
 hen you unlock a Certification benefit,
it can be used immediately.
•	 K
 eep an eye on the Production Cycle
and Week markers. The end of the game
may happen sooner than you expect.

23

FINAL SCORING
At the end of the game, each player per forms
the following steps:
1.	 S pend 1 Speech token per achievement
you wish to score on the Final Goal
tile. Each player may score each
achievement on the tile once (more
than one player can score the same
achievement). You may use Generic
speech tokens. Final Goal tiles are
explained on Reference book.

4.	 G ain PP for each of your cars on your
garages. You can find this score under
the Garages in your player board.
	The value of the cars are the following:
City Car - 2 PP, SUV - 3PP, Truck - 4PP,
Sports - 5PP, Concept - 6PP.

6.	 For each of your Tested Designs,
gain PP equal to the value of the Car
Part depicted on it. The Part’s value is
indicated above the Upgrade Value
track). Remember, a Tested Design is an
Upgraded Design for a Car you have in
your garages. These are the designs above
your player board.

Example:
P u rp le ha s 2 Cit y Ca rs, a Tru c k a nd 1
Sp o rt s Ca rs in her ga ra ge. P u rp le sc o res
1 3 P P s.

Example:
He al s o have upgr ad ed Des i gns for the
fol l owi ng M od el s :
Dr i veTr ai n from the Ci ty Car s , a E ngi ne
and Autopi l ot Sy s tem from the Spor ts
Car, no Upgr ad es on the Tr uck and
another engi ne from a concept Car.

Orange achieved all goals, but since she only has 2
Speech tokens, she can score only 2 of the goals. Orange
chooses to score the 1st and the 2nd ones gain her 15 PP.

2.	 Earn 1 PP per Shift you have banked.

Purple gains 4 PP for the City Cars, 4 PP for the Truck and 5
PP for the Sports car.

5.	 Score the relative positions on each
department’s Training track:

T he Des i gns from the Ci ty Car s , and the
Spor ts Car are cons i d ered to be Tes ted
Des i gns as he has at l eas t 1 matchi ng
Car i n hi s gar ages . T he Upgr ad ed E ngi ne
from the Concept i s not cons i d ered to
be tes ted , becaus e there i s any Concept
Car i n hi s G ar ages .
He therefore s cores for the val ue of the
Dr i vetr ai n, E ngi ne and Autopi l ot Sy s tem
Car par ts s hown i n the Val ue Par ts Tr ack;
6 + 5 + 4 = 15 PP

•	 First: 5 PP
•	 Second: 3 PP
•	 Third: 1 PP

Example:
Purple gains 2 PP, Yellow 4 PP, Blue and Orange 0 PP.

I n t his sit u a t io n, Ora nge sc o res 5 P P, Blu e
sc o res 3 P P a nd no b o dy sc o res t he 1 P P
fo r 3 rd p la c e.

3.	 E arn 1 PP per Speech token (either your
own color, or Generic), Book, and Parts
Voucher on your Player board.

Purple gains: 6 PP for testing the Drivetrain, 5 PP for the
tested Autopilot System, and 4 points for his tested Engine.

The player with the most PP is the winner.

Yellow and Purple didn’t train, so they gain 0 PP.

In the event of a tie, the tie-breakers are
as follows:
1.	The most Cars

24
Blue gains 4 PP.

Note: If two players are tied in position, the player
whose marker is on top is considered to be
ahead. A player who has not done any training in a department cannot earn any PP for
this step.

2.	The most Tested Designs
3.	The most Banked Shifts
If still tied, all tied players share that
position.

