K ut u zoV

The War

in

Russia , 1812

Rule Book
Game Design by Mark McLaughlin
Game Developed by Fred Schachter

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2

11  Interception & Evasion  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 19

1  Playing Pieces, the Map, Game Charts & Cards .  .  . 3

12  Battles  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21

2  Getting Ready to Play  . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6

13  Fortresses  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 26

3  Control  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7

14  Attrition  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 27

4  Playing The Game  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8

15  Sea Movement  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 30

5  Cards  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10

16  Resources  . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 31

6  Building & Regrouping  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12

17  Interphase  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 33

7  Flags  . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13

18  Special rules  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 35

8  Diplomacy  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14

19  Ending the Game  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 35

9  Morale  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14

20  Victory  . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 38

10  Movement  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17

Index  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

GMT Games, LLC
P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
www.GMTGames.com

back cover

xxxx

Introduction
What is this game about?
In the spring of 1812 the Emperor Napoleon of France gathered
the regiments of 20 nations together into the largest military
force yet raised in Europe. That June he led this Grand Army
of over 600,000 men across the Nieman River to begin what
he believed would be his greatest triumph and perhaps final
war: the invasion and subjugation of Tsarist Russia. As the
defending armies fell back before this prodigious onslaught,
Tsar Alexander turned to a pugnacious and crafty old warrior
to help save his country, his people and his Romanov Dynasty:
Marshal Mikhail Kutuzov. This game allows you to recreate
the epic campaign of 1812 and explore its many possibilities.
“I should be cursed by posterity were I regarded as the first to
take any steps toward a settlement of any sort. Such is the
spirit of my nation.”
—M. Kutuzov

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Cover Image: “The Retreat” by Vereschagin; from the album
“The Patriotic War Of 1812” (Bozherianov, St. Petersburg, 1911)
How many players can play the game?
You can play this game with 2, 3 or 4 players. Each generally
plays one or both Powers of one side of this historic conflict:
French (Imperial) or Russian (Tsarist). Rule 1.1 defines player
Powers; then see rules 2.1 – 2.3 starting on page 6 for detailed
rules about how to split up sides with different numbers of
players. You can play Kutuzov on your own, but you will lose
much of the fog of war and surprise, those twists and turns
of the unexpected, that makes the game a tense, exciting and
enjoyable experience. However, playing even parts of the game
solitaire will help you understand its rules more quickly.
How do you win the game?
The French Powers’ goal is to conquer Russia; the Russian
Powers’ goal is to defend it. The winner is the player of the
side which best achieves that goal. In 3 or 4 player games, the
individual winner is the player Power on the winning team
which has done most to achieve that team’s victory. See rules
19 and 20 for detailed victory rules.

Page 

What pieces should you have in your game?
This game contains:

●

Two Player Aid Cards with Game Tables, a Battle Chart and
other useful rule reminders.

●

This rulebook with rules index.

●

A Play Book comprising Historical, Design & Players’
Notes, along with a ‘How to Play Kutuzov’ tutorial example,
a Glossary of Game Terms, Roster of cards, Game Start SetUp Maps and other features.

●

20 plastic stands and 8 six-sided dice.

●

30 round plastic chips to represent “Scorched Earth”
(16.57).

Questions?
If there are any components damaged or missing, please contact us at:
GMT Games, P. O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
If you have any questions about the rules, we’ll be glad to
answer them if you send them to that address with a self-addressed, stamped envelope. For faster response, we’re on the
Internet at:
www.gmtgames.com
Or send email to:
alewis@gmtgames.com or mgmprsm@yahoo.com
The game Developer, Fred Schachter, also monitors the Kutuzov webpage of ConSimWorld.com and will respond to questions
via that medium as well.
How do you get ready to play the game?
The players should set up the game according to the information on their Game Turn Start Set-Up Instructions by Power
for the correct Turn. See Part Four of the Play Book for corresponding detailed starting rules.
Before reading the rules…
Reading the rules—Please do not try to memorize the rules!
Furthermore, on your first reading ignore the rule cross-references. After you have scanned the rules and cards, examine the
game pieces. Then play through a couple of turns for practice,
or follow the ‘How to Play Kutuzov’ tutorial in the Play Book.
You should then have a fair grasp of the game’s basics. Use the
rules whenever you need to remind yourself or find out how to
do something.
Rules numbering—We have numbered the rules to help
organize them, and to help you find the rules you need more
easily.

●

One 22 x 34 map.

●

110 cards.

●

Four sets of die cut playing pieces.

●

Eight Game Set-up Headquarters Cards containing Army
Holding Boxes (for each Game Set-up, one Card for each
Power). Starting forces and their game start positions are
listed on each Headquarters Card. Each Power has two
cards: Card A, with one side of each card printed for the
June/July 1812 Game Start (Turn 1), and the other for the
Aug./Sept. 1812 Game Start (Turn 2). Another set of Cards,
Card B, has the Oct./Nov./Dec. 1812 Game Start (Turn 3)
printed on one side, and the non-historical Jan./Feb./Mar.
1813 Game Start (Turn 4) printed on its other side.

Examples: To make the rules easier to understand we have included examples. We have highlighted many of the examples like
this paragraph so that they stand out from the main rules text.

Definitions—Like many war games, Kutuzov uses some
words that have a special meaning in the game. For example,
each of the land spaces on the map is called a Duchy or a Zone.
Generally, the rules explain these words the first time they appear, or along with the main rules they affect. However, there
is also an index of defined terms in the Glossary. Words with
special meanings in the game are Capitalized throughout these
rules.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Play Book—To help you understand the rules, the Play Book
has a ‘How to Play Kutuzov’ tutorial starting on page 6. If
there is any conflict between the tutorial and the rules, follow
the rules. Additionally, the Play Book contains a Compendium
of Tables, extended examples of play cross-referenced to the
appropriate section of these rules, Game Set-Up Alternatives
(Scenarios) with associated Players’ & Historical Notes, and
the Glossary of Kutuzov game terms.

the map are called Zones. The Baltic Sea is also represented; it
is treated as a single, separate and unique space.
1.21 Duchies
Each Duchy represents an historically significant area. A
Duchy’s color shows which Power Controls that Duchy at the
start of the game. A Duchy’s shape and other markings shows
certain effects set out in the following list of the different types
of Duchies.

1. Playing Pieces, the Map,
Game Charts & Cards
1.1 Powers

Before looking at the playing pieces you should know what a
Power is in Kutuzov. The four Powers in the game are:
a)	 the French Northern Army;
b)	 the French Southern Army;

Capital—a Duchy with a Dashed Border is a Capital. Moscow
and St. Petersburg are the only Capitals.

c)	 the Russian First Army; and
d)	 the Russian Second Army.

1.12 Allied Nations
There are two Allied Nations in the game: Prussia and Austria.
Prussia and Austria are not Powers. Both begin the game in the
Imperial Camp. The Prussians begin under the command of
the French Northern Army and the Austrians begin under the
command of the French Southern Army.
Colors—each Power and Allied Nation has its own primary
color for its playing pieces and the map, as follows:

Blue

France (Southern Army)

Red

Prussia

Black

Austria

Grey

Russia (First Army)

Green

Russia (Second Army)

Yellow

Home—a Duchy matching the color of its Power or Allied
Nation is a Home Duchy. For example, Warsaw, Lukow and
Ostrolenka are all French Southern Army Home Duchies.
Key—any non-circular Duchy is a Key (e.g. a diamond-shaped
Duchy). A Duchy can be a Fortress and a Key. For example,
Riga, Brest and Narva are all Keys.
Shared—with the exception of six yellow Keys, all of the
Duchies in Russia are green. Treat all Duchies in Russia under
Control of either Tsarist Power as Shared, i.e friendly to both
Russian Powers. The six yellow Duchies show where the Russian Second Army may build its Formations; the six green Keys
show where the Russian First Army may build its Formations.
For example: Kiev is a Shared Duchy, friendly to both Tsarist
Powers, but only Formations of that color (yellow, indicating
Second Army) may be built in Kiev. Exceptions: Moscow and
Warsaw, 6.31. This concept also applies to Zones, 1.24.

Primary Colors Chart
France (Northern Army)

Fortress—a star-shaped Duchy is a Fortress. The number
above it shows its built-in defence or strength rating. This is
normally two, except for Riga and Königsberg, which are four
each. For example, Brest is a Fortress. It has a built-in defence
rating of two.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

1.11 Camps
The four Powers are divided between two opposing Camps in
Kutuzov. The two French Powers are known as the Imperial
Camp (‘Imperials’) and the two Russian Powers are known as
the Tsarist Camp (‘Tsarists’).

Depot—a Duchy with a Star is a Depot. Warsaw and Kiev are
Depots. Moscow and St. Petersburg are also Depots (as well
as being Capitals). Riga and Smolensk are both Depots and
Fortresses.

Port—a Duchy with an anchor symbol at sea is a Port. For
example, Narva is a Port.
Note—The terms Russian and Tsarist are interchangeable – as
are the terms French and Imperial – unless a rule specifically
says otherwise.

1.2 The Map

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Clear—a white line outlined
in black. For example, the Line
of March between Moscow
and Borodino is Clear.

Page 

The map represents the area where Napoleon’s invasion of
Russia took place. It has spaces for the playing pieces, with
connections showing where the pieces may move. A land
space is called a Duchy. The large boxed spaces on the sides of

1.22 Lines of March
Duchies and Zones are linked by Lines of March. There are
four types of Line of March. Each type affects movement,
Attrition, Battle, retreats, Interception and Evasion. The four
types are:

Marsh—a dashed black line.
For example, the Line of March
between Pinsk and Bobruisk is
Marsh.
River—a blue dotted line. For
example, the Line of March between Masuria and Grodno is
a River.
Rough—a brown line. For example, the Line of March
between Kiev and Konotop is
Rough.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

1.23 Adjacent Duchies
Duchies connected to each
other by a single Line of March
are Adjacent. For example,
Minsk and Lida are Adjacent.
Minsk and Volozhin are not
Adjacent.
1.24 Zones
There are 11 Zones. These represent large areas of land, equivalent to numerous Duchies. These Zones are located along the
edges of the map. A Zone matching the color of its Power or
Allied Nation is a Home Zone. The four Imperial Zones called
Austria, Galicia, Poland and Prussia are considered to be connected by Clear Lines of March to any other Zones to which
they are adjacent. For example, Galicia is adjacent to both Poland and Austria. Poland is adjacent to Galicia but not to
Austria.

1.3 Impulse Track

The Impulse Track is a display on the map showing the normal
order (1-4) in which Powers act during the Sequence of Play:

Soldier Chart
Soldier Type

1

Cavalry

2

Artillery

4

Kutuzov Force Pool
Power

Infantry

Cavalry

Artillery

TOTAL

st

Rus 1

19

6

3

28

Rus 2

nd

19

6

3

28

Austrian

7

3

1

11

Prussian

4

2

-

6

Fr. North

19

6

3

28

Fr. South

19

6

3

28

There is also a counter mix of all other pieces used in the game,
e.g. markers. These include: Morale Level, Morale Change, Morale Gain, Morale Loss, Will to Fight?, Battle or Failed Intercept
(backprinted with Siege Resolvable), Imperial Attrition Gain,
Imperial Attrition Loss, Imperial To the Bridges (with Pontoon
Bridge Symbol), Retreat from Moscow Rule 19.7, Pre-emption,
Keys Controlled, Attrition Level, Entrenchment, Resources
Markers, etc. There are also Event Reminder markers for each
card whose Event title is underlined and opaque red colored
plastic “Bingo Chips” for use as “Scorched Earth” markers.

1.6 Leaders and Formations

Each oblong piece represents a Leader and the
specialized support elements of his Army. (At
times this could include a considerable body of
troops. A Leader represents far more than just
one person.) Every Leader has a Battle Rating
and a Command Rating.

2. Russian First Army
3. French Southern Army
4. Russian Second Army

1.4 Turn Track

A Leader’s Battle Rating is the first number
(unboxed) on his counter (from 1 to 5; “2” on
the Platov Leader example to the left). Battle
Ratings feature in the rules for Interception,
Evasion and Battles/Sieges.

1.5 Soldiers

A Leader’s Command Rating is the second number (boxed)
on his counter (4, 6 or 8; “4” on the Platov Leader example
above). A Leader’s Command Rating is the maximum number
of Strength Points and Leaders (combined) of his Power that
his Army may contain (unless modified by card Event).

The Turn Track is a display on the map. You should put the
Game Turn marker on the Turn Track to show the current
Game Turn.

Page 

Infantry

You may make change at any time. For example, you may replace two infantry (2 Strength
Points) with one cavalry (worth the same 2
Strength Points). Furthermore, you can make
change the other way round, replacing one
cavalry with two infantry. However, the number of Soldier pieces in the game is an absolute
limit; you may not create any more. If there are no pieces of
the correct type available, you may have to lose some Strength
Points. Kutuzov’s Force Pool of pieces is:

1. French Northern Army

This order is called Impulse Track Order. The rules specify other situations when players should act in Impulse Track Order.

Strength Points

Each round piece is a Soldier worth a number of Strength
Points according to the type:

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Insert the Leaders into plastic bases to stand upright as they
enter play. When two or more Leaders occupy the same Duchy/
Zone, one of the Leaders is the Commander and all the rest
become Staff Officers. Players should replace Leaders who
become Staff Officers with their appropriate square piece
(10.54), or place the stand-mounted Leader in the appropriate
Commander’s Section of their Headquarters Card.
1.61 Formation
A Soldier, Leader or any combination of Soldiers and Leaders occupying a Duchy or Zone is a Formation. For example,
an Army is a Formation and so is an Army Group. A Flag is
neither a Formation nor part of one. All references to Duchies
in this rule section also apply to Zones.

1.8 Battleground Chart

The Battleground Chart has a display to track losses in Battle,
as well as reminders about salient Battle and other rules.

1.9 Key Control Track & Key Control Markers
Use the Tsarist Key Control Track printed on
the map to indicate how many Keys both Tsarist
Powers control. Each Camp has a marker for this
Chart. Adjust the markers as a Camp gains and
loses Control of Keys.

Duchy Key Control Markers are provided to help the players
keep track of which Keys they each control. Use of these markers is optional. They are provided to make the game easier to
play.
These markers are supplemented by additional Duchy Control
Markers for the Baltic Ports and Pripyet Marsh Bonus Victory
Points (20.3). Use them the same as Key Control Markers.

Kutuzov has a Command Rating of 6. He may have, for example,
an Army with one Leader and 5 Strength Points of Soldiers, or
two Leaders (as Staff Officers, per 1.63) and 4 Strength Points
of Soldiers, or just 6 Strength Points of his Power’s Soldiers.
Kutuzov may not move or attack with more than 6 Strength
Points in his Army, whether those Strength points are Staff Officers or Soldiers. For example, if Kutuzov with a 4SP artillery
piece in his section of the First Army Headquarters Card enters
Moscow, which contains another 4SP artillery piece, only by
breaking down one of the two artillery pieces so that Kutuzov
has 6SP (e.g. an artillery and a cavalry) could Kutuzov’s Army
have its 6SP maximum.

1.63 Army Group
Two or more Friendly Armies form an Army Group (10.6) if
they are in the same Duchy or Zone, or are moving together.
They are led by a single Leader, called the Commander, who is
placed on the map in a plastic stand to represent the entire
Army Group. All other Leaders in that Army Group are placed
in the Commander’s section of the Headquarters Card, or replaced with their appropriate square Staff Officer piece, while
remaining in the Commander’s location.

1.7 Flags

1.10 Cards

Game action is generated by the play of cards. Unless it is a
Must Play card, each card has a Command Point value circled
at the top left. All cards have an Event below.

●

Players use Command Points to build and/or move their
Leaders and Soldiers as well as place and remove Flags.
Command Points may also be used in attempts to influence
Morale and Imperial Attrition.

●

The Events – historical incidents – happen when a player
uses a card and declares the Event instead of using its Command Points (if any).

There are 24 Home Cards, 12 for the Tsarists and 12 for the
Imperials.
a)	 The Tsarists share all of their Home Cards.
b)	 The Imperials share their Home Cards, with two
exceptions:
i) “My Old Moustaches” (card 1), which is always dealt
out to the French Northern Power; and
ii) “Battalions du Marche” (card 9), which is always dealt
to the French Southern Power.
Home Cards are special cards because no Power may use another Camp’s Home Cards. Neither Imperial Power may use

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 

A Flag is a hexagonal marker representing
the inherent garrison of a Duchy and showing
which Power Controls that Duchy. A Power’s
Flags match its color. For example, French
Northern Army Flags are on counters with a
blue background. Players use Flags to show a Power’s Control
of any Duchy it did not own at the start of play (where not appropriately indicated by the printed map). The number of Flags
in the game – 60 French, 16 Russian and 11 Imperial Allied – is
an absolute limit; you may not make any more. See Section 7

Standard, Imperial Home and Tsarist Home card backs

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

1.62 Army
A Leader may form an Army in a Duchy with Strength Points
of Soldiers and Leaders up to that Leader’s Command Rating. The Soldiers and Leaders must be of the same Power as
the Army Leader. For the Imperials, the Soldiers and Leaders
must also be of the same nationality as the Army Leader. Extra
Soldiers in the same Duchy beyond the Leader’s Command
Rating may defend with the Army, but are not part of that
Army and may not attack or move with it. A lone Leader is
also considered to be an Army.

for more detailed rules about Flags. Note that a Flag is never
placed to indicate control of a Zone (3.2).

Tsarist Home Cards but both may use Imperial Home Cards,
and the other way round. See Section 5 for detailed rules about
the cards and how to play them.

2. Getting Ready To Play
Two to four people may play Kutuzov.

2.1 Four Players

Each player chooses and plays one of the four Powers: the First
Army or the Second Army in the Tsarist Camp, and the French
Northern Army (with its Prussian Allied Army) or the French
Southern Army (with its Austrian Allied Army) in the Imperial
Camp. Players may not examine each others hands of cards.

2.2 Three Players

There are two options here:

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

2.21 One Tsarist
In this option, one player plays both Tsarist Powers. The other
players each take one of the Imperial Powers. The two Imperial
Powers’ players may freely examine one another’s card hands.
2.22 One Imperial
In this option, one player takes control of both Imperial Powers
while the other players each take one of the Tsarist Powers. The
two Tsarist Powers’ players may freely examine one another’s
card hands.

2.3 Two Players

There are three options here:
2.31 The Regular Two Player Game
In this option one player plays both Tsarist Powers and the other
plays both Imperial Powers. Each Power has its own Hand of cards.
Opposing players may not examine each other’s card hands.
2.32 The Single Hand Per Player Game
In this option one player plays both Tsarist Powers. The other
plays both Imperial Powers. Each player – not Power (per 2.6)
– has his or her own Hand of cards (see Part Six of the Play
Book for details). This version of the game is recommended for
those not yet familiar with Kutuzov’s cards, as it spares two
players needing to look back and forth between each of their
Power’s card Hands to make game decisions. The rulebook
assumes you are playing with one Hand of Cards per Power,
so the Single Hand Per Player version creates some exceptions
to the standard rules. To avoid unnecessary cross-referencing,
we put everything you need to know about the Single Hand Per
Player version in the Play Book.

Page 

2.33 The Split Personality Game
In this option, one player takes the Imperial Northern Army
and the Tsarist Second Army (each with its own Hand of cards)
and the other takes the Imperial Southern Army and the Tsarist
First Army (each with its own Hand of cards). In this option
a player may only use a Power’s cards to benefit its Camp ,
otherwise 5.1 applies.

For example, if you are playing the Imperial North Army in the
Split Personality Game, you may not play a specifically Imperial card Event, or one open to interpretation, to benefit your
Tsarist Russian Second Army.

The game may be played with both players keeping their respective card hands secret from each other OR players may
reveal each other’s cards (aka a Team of Two in a Three Player
Game). Choose the method before commencing play.
We recommend that you do not try the Split Personality Game
until you are familiar with Kutuzov’s other versions! Playing
one Power of each side can result in a convoluted labyrinth
of a game with ‘wheels within wheels’ strategies and tactics
becoming possible. For two players it can be an interesting and
perplexing experience to be both partners and rivals simultaneously throughout the game. But remember, first and foremost,
only a single Power can win! See 19 and 20.
2.34 Resolving Disputes While Choosing Sides
Players who cannot agree which Power or Powers they will
play may either (a) roll dice to determine their selection; or (b)
bid a number of Strength Points they are willing to forfeit to
command that Power or Powers. The highest bidder removes
the number of Strength Points bid from the chosen Power’s
(or Powers’) Soldiers anywhere on the map before play begins.
The second, third and fourth highest bidders take second, third
and fourth choices of Powers but do not remove any Strength
Points. Resolve ties by die roll.

2.4 Starting Set-up for a Turn 1
Game Start
2.41 Background, Turn 1 Game Start: “Invasion:
Across the Nieman!”
See the Play Book Part Four for details. This is the standard
set-up for players wishing to explore the entire 1812 Napoleonic Invasion of Russia Campaign from its beginning: Turn 1
(June/July 1812).
There are three other Game Start Scenarios if you want a
shorter game or wish to explore two of the Campaign’s major historical watersheds as starting points. A game starting
on Turn 2 (August/September 1812) shows the situation just
before Napoleon’s Assault on Smolensk, and a game starting
on Turn 3 (October/November/December 1812) depicts the
situation with Napoleon already in Moscow, pondering what
to do next.
A Turn 1 game start should see the French and their Allies’ military juggernaut smash across the border and attempt to catch
and annihilate the Russians before they can mass to defend
their Motherland. Can the players surpass their respective
historical counterparts?
See Section 2.9 for similar descriptions regarding the other
Kutuzov scenarios.
2.42 Setting up the Game
The starting location of all Formations is given in the Army
Set-Up description for each Power according to the Turn Start
agreed on (Turn 1, 2, 3, or 4). Place each Power’s initial pieces
in their indicated starting positions on the map or in their re-

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

spective Army Holding Boxes. Refer to the appropriate Play
Book section for placement of any markers. Game Set-Up
Maps are provided in the Play Book for game set-up purposes.
Use whichever method you prefer.

2.5 Starting Markers & Resources

The placement of other Markers including Morale, Attrition,
Entrenchment, Scorched Earth, Morale Gain/Loss, and (for
the Imperials) Attrition Gain/Loss are depicted This will vary
according to the Game Turn you choose to start on. See Play
Book Part Four for details.

2.6 Starting Hands

Regardless of the number of players or game start Turn, give
each of the four Powers a separate Hand of cards according to
the details in the Play Book for the scenario.

2.7 Hands, Resources & Powers

Cards must be kept secret from the opposing Camp and are
only revealed when played. If playing a single Power in the
Four Player version of Kutuzov, you may not describe or show
cards to any other player, including your Camp Ally, unless an
Event explicitly allows this.
Exception: in Three Player games, the player with two Powers has the advantage of seeing both those Powers’ Hands of
cards at all times and playing them however that player sees
fit, without needing to consult another player. Therefore, the
Players with one Power each may examine each other’s cards
and cooperate with one another, as long as their card Hands
and Resources are kept separate. This is also an option with
the Two Player “Split Personality” Game.

2.8 Mulligans

Once the starting Hands are dealt, the player for each Power,
in Impulse Track Order, decides whether to keep the Hand, or
discard cards from it for replacement by drawing one fewer
card. Put your discards face up in the Discard card pile with
only the top card visible. Discarding in this manner is called
‘doing a Mulligan’.
Important—You must not discard Home cards or Must Play
cards. But, if you decide to discard, you must discard all the
cards you can. In other words, you may not just discard the bad
cards in the Hand!
The French Northern Army Power has a starting Hand of 3
Home Cards and 5 other cards. He decides to ‘do a Mulligan’.
If one of the 5 non-Home cards is a Must Play card, the player
must discard the other 4 cards, but keep the Home Cards and
the Must Play card. He then draws 3 new cards – one fewer
than he discarded – from the Draw Pile.

Continuing the previous example, let’s assume the player for
the French Northern Army decides to do a Mulligan with his
new Hand of the same 3 Home Cards, the Must Play card and
3 other new cards. One of the new cards is another Must Play
card, so the French Northern Army Power may only discard
the two remaining non-Must Play cards in its Hand and replace
them with a single, newly drawn card. The Power must keep the
2 Must Play cards and now has a total Hand of 3 Home cards, 2
Must Play cards, and 1 newly drawn card (a total of 6 cards).

2.9 Kutuzov Scenarios

Play Book Part Four has Kutuzov Scenarios that enable players
to start a game with Turn 2 or Turns 3 or 4. Each Scenario uses
all rules unless specifically modified. The Scenarios are:

2.91 Game Turn 2 Start: “On to Smolensk!” 		
(August/September 1812)
This permits players to skip the border battles and initial French
advances and begin play at a watershed of the Campaign: the
Grand Armee confronts concentrated Russian forces defending Smolensk, immediately before Marshal Kutuzov arrives to
take command. Will the French overcome Smolensk’s defenders and advance on Moscow, as they did historically, or seek
victory in an alternative direction—north to St. Petersburg, or
south to seize the Ukraine?
2.92 Game Turn 3 Start: “Napoleon in Moscow” 	
(October/November/December 1812)
In this version of Kutuzov, the bloody Battle of Borodino has
been fought. The Grand Armee reposes in Moscow, awaiting
Russian surrender or at least agreement to terms. The first
chill snow of Winter has fallen, a harbinger of what’s to come.
Should the French remain deep in Russia, hoping to conquer
the country, or is it time to withdraw to better defences for the
1813 Campaign?
2.93 Game Turn 4 Start: “Defend the Empire” 		
(January/February/March 1813)
In this version of Kutuzov, Players are confronted by a hypothetical situation. In this one-Turn contest, the Russians are
under severe time pressure. They need to make every card
count! Can the Tsarists use their winter advantages and superior mobility to pry the still-dangerous Imperial forces out of
Russian territory and then cross the border to bring the war to
Napoleon’s empire?

3. Control
3.1 Control of A Duchy

Control of Duchies is an important part of the game. The Power
Controlling a Duchy at the start of the game, as shown by the
Duchy’s map-printed color, Controls that Duchy unless there
is an enemy Formation or Flag there. For example, if there is
no Imperial Flag or Formation in St. Petersburg, the Russian

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 

After a player has done a Mulligan, he may do another Mulligan before the next Power goes. The Power discards all the
cards it can – again keeping Home cards and Must Play cards

Note—An accumulation of Must Play cards could prevent
further Mulligan plays.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Each Hand of cards and each Resource belongs to one specific
Power. Therefore, if a player is taking the side of two Powers,
that player has a Hand and Resource(s) (2.5) for each Power,
which must be kept separate. You may not trade cards or Resources between Powers.

– and draws a new Hand, once again with one fewer card. A
player can keep doing Mulligans before the next Power goes,
but each time receives one fewer card.

First Army Power Controls it. If there is an Imperial Flag and
no enemy Formation in a Duchy, the Power whose Flag it is
Controls that Duchy. For example, if there is a French Northern Army Flag in Moscow and no Tsarist Formation there, the
French Northern Army Controls it.
An enemy Formation in a non-fortified Duchy cancels the
original Controlling Power’s Control, but does not yet Control
it until its Power Flags it.
Example: if there is an Imperial Formation but no Imperial
Flag in Moscow, the Duchy is Uncontrolled. If there is an Imperial Flag but also a Tsarist Formation in Moscow, the Duchy
is Uncontrolled.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Important—A Controlled Duchy does not pass into Uncontrolled status until after the resolution of Evasion (11.7) or
Battle (12.4) inclusive of any Retreat (12.6), Rout (12.7) or
Overrun (12.8).
A Fortress Duchy with an enemy Formation is Friendly to the
Fortress owner and Controlled by the Fortress-owning Power.
However, it is considered Uncontrolled to the besieger. For example, Brest is a Russian Second Army Fortress. If there is an
Imperial Formation there, the Russian Second Army Controls
the Fortress and the Duchy is Uncontrolled by the Imperials.
To change ownership of the Fortress requires successful resolution of a Siege (13).

Attrition—	

This affects Formations of both
Camps in Uncontrolled Duchies/
Zones (14).

Attrition Level—	

The Imperial Camp checks for a possible change to its Imperial Attrition
Table Level (14.43).

Cossacks—	

Cossacks attack every Flagged Imperial-Controlled unfortified Duchy in
Russia that does not contain at least
one Imperial Soldier or Leader (4.4).

Morale—	

Players work out if each Camp’s Morale Level changes (9.2).

Resource Balancing—	No Power may end a Turn with more
than five Resources (4.6).
Defeat & Conquest—	 If there has been no Sudden Death
Game End, the players check for
Potential Imperial Defeat (a Tsarist
Victory) or Imperial Conquest of
Russia (an Imperial Victory) (19.5).

An enemy Flagged Duchy may be Flagged by the Power of a
Camp who did not originally control it, if that Power captures
the Duchy from the enemy (8.1).

Peace & Victory—	

From Turn 2 onwards, if the game
has not yet ended, one player makes a
Peace Roll that may end play (19.6).

3.2 Control of A Zone

End of Turn—	

The players carry out an Interphase
if the game has not ended before the
start of Game Turn 4. In the Interphase players prepare for the next
Game Turn (17).

A Zone is always Controlled by the Power which Controls it at
the start of the game. A Zone may not be seized and Flagged by
an enemy Formation through an attack of any kind. Exception:
Control of a Zone may change through play of an Event. See
“Gustavus’ Revenge” (card 28).
●

Any Formation occupying an enemy-controlled Zone is considered to be in an Uncontrolled enemy Home Duchy for all
rule purposes.

●

However, that Zone remains a friendly Home Duchy to the
owning Power for all rule purposes.

4. Playing The Game

4.1 Game Turns

This is an outline of what happens during a Turn, in sequence:
Impulses—	

4.2 Impulses

Each Power becomes Active in Impulse Track Order; this
means the active Power must play a card or Resources to buy a
card as detailed below. Each Power’s opportunity to be Active
is called a Scheduled Impulse.
Important—The exception to Scheduled Impulse Track Order
is a pre-emptive Impulse (4.22).

In an Impulse the Active Power:

The game is played in four or fewer Turns. The first two Turns
each represent approximately two months. The second two
Turns, which are Winter Turns, represent three months each.
After each Turn, the players determine if the game will continue into the next Turn. If so, the players carry out an Interphase
to prepare for the next Turn.

Page 

(4.2). Once you finish all Impulses,
unplayed Home cards must be discarded. Then you go on to Attrition
and each of the following steps in the
listed order.

Players play cards to trigger Events,
move and build Soldiers, Leaders
and Flags, spend Resources (16), and
carry out other actions. Each Turn
includes several Rounds of Impulses

●

may spend two Resources (to acquire a non-Home card,
16.3); and

●

if the Power spent two Resources to acquire a card. it may
play an eligible non “+” card if it has one; and

●

if the Power did not spend two Resources to acquire a card,
it must play a card if it has one.

To put it another way, unless spending Resources to acquire
a card, every Power must play a card out of its Hand during
its Scheduled Impulse, if it has a card available. If it does not
have either a card or at least two Resources willingly spent
to acquire a card, it must pass (4.23). There are other ways to
spend Resources (see rule 16), but these are not considered for
card-playing purposes.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

At the end of the Impulse, the owning players must remove all
Battle or Failed Intercept markers on the map (see 11.4), and
then move the Impulse marker one space along the Impulse
Track. It is now the indicated Power’s Scheduled Impulse. See
4.24 for the rules on ending Impulses.
When the Russian Second Army Power has played or passed,
the Impulse marker returns to the French Northern Army at
the start of the Track. This is known as completing a Round.
See 4.24.

Marker as a reminder. Place it upon the appropriate Power’s
Impulse Track Box.
For example, after the first Round of Game Turn 1, it’s the
French Northern Army’s turn to have an Impulse. Even if the
Russian Second Army had the most playable cards, it could not
pre-empt. Why? Because then the Russian Second Army would
have two Impulses in a row. But, if either the Russian First
Army or French Southern Army Power had the most playable
cards they could pre-empt the French Northern Army.

4.21 Played & Discarded Cards
Unlike Wellington and The Napoleonic Wars, Kutuzov lacks
map-printed areas for placing its Regular Card and Home Card
(Reserve, 5.4) Decks. Players should place these three decks
conveniently near the map. Put played and discarded cards (but
not Home cards) face up on top of the discard pile. Put played
Home cards face up on top of the appropriate Camp’s Home
Card Reserve Deck. Exceptions: when “My Old Moustaches”
(card 1) is played, do not put it in the Home card deck. Instead,
leave it face up near the Imperial Northern Army Headquarters
Card. When “Battalions du Marche” (card 9) is played, leave it
face up near the Imperial Southern Army Headquarters Card.

After resolving the pre-emption, play must return to the preempted Power’s Scheduled Impulse. Successive pre-emptions
are not allowed, even if another Power has more playable cards.
Note that a Power without playable cards has no Scheduled
Impulse and therefore may not be pre-empted—even during a
Siege. Do not move the Impulse Marker during a pre-emption.

No player may inspect or count the discard pile, except for the
top card which is of course face up and visible. No player may
inspect or count the cards in their respective Home Card Reserve Deck, unless permitted to do so by an Event.

4.24 End of Round; End of Turn
After the Russian Second Army Power plays or passes, the
Impulse Track has completed a Round and, unless pre-empted
(4.22), the Impulse marker is returned to the French Northern
Army Box. Unless Sudden Death Game End occurs (19.1), repeat
this sequence until only one of the four Powers has one or more
playable cards. Once that Power finishes its Impulse by playing
at least one card and/or spending two Resources to acquire a
card (16.3), all Impulses for that Turn are over. That ends the
Impulses part of the Turn. The next part of the Turn is Attrition.

Some cards are immediately shuffled back into the deck
after their Event is played. Example: “Fresh Disasters” (card
100) as well as cards 48, 68 & 86.

●

Other cards are immediately shuffled back into the deck with
all the cards in the discard pile after their Event is played.
These cards say: “Place in Discard Pile and Reshuffle”. Example: “Mud, Mud and More Mud” (card 38) as well as
cards 31, 35 & 39.

●

There are 12 Must Play cards specially marked with an asterisk (*) and “Remove from play – then 14.62”. Remove these
cards from the game after their Event is played. Exception:
in the first Turn, some of these cards (numbers 30, 33, 36,
40, 45, and 46) can have their Event played more than once
before being removed. They are set aside for a later return
to the game as French Attrition Must Play cards during
Winter Turns only. See 14.62 for full details.

●

There are “leave face-up until the end of turn then return
to deck” cards which stay near the Power HQ Card which
played it until a Turn’s Impulses are complete (4.24). These
are cards 22, 47, 52 & 97.

●

Some cards are removed from play: see 5.7.

4.4 Cossacks

Cossacks are Russian irregular forces not depicted by specific
pieces in the game. They attack every Imperial Controlled
unfortified Duchy in Russia that does not have at least one
Imperial Soldier or Leader present.

Roll a die for each such Duchy. Add 1 to the die roll if that
Duchy is Adjacent to one or more Tsarist Formations. (Only
add 1 to the die roll, even if the Duchy is adjacent to more than
one Tsarist Formation.) Modify the die roll by a further +1 if
the Imperial Morale Level has been reduced to the Sauve Qui
Peut box. The maximum modifier is therefore +2. Subtract one
from the die roll if Must Play card 37, “Polish Lancers”, was
played during the just-concluded Turn’s Impulses.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 

4.22 Pre-emptive Impulse
After completing the first Round of Game Turn 1 (June/July
1812), the Power with the most playable cards – including unplayed Home cards – may pre-empt the Order of Play. If one
or more Powers tie for the most unplayed cards, none can
pre-empt. Pre-empting allows a Power to take an immediate
non-scheduled Impulse. A Power may not pre-empt if doing so
would give it two Impulses in a row, even over the span of two
Turns. Players may optionally use the game’s “Pre-emption”

4.3 Attrition

Attrition is the game’s way of representing the wear and tear of
war: the ongoing losses in men, horses and materiel caused by
disease, malnutrition, cold and sheer exhaustion. At this point
in the Turn every Formation in an Uncontrolled Duchy or Zone
suffers Attrition. (See 14 for the detailed rules about Attrition
and how it relates to Morale.) After working out Attrition for
Imperial Formations, the Imperial Player checks if the Imperial Attrition Level deteriorates (14.43). Surviving Formations
then place their Flag, or remove an opposing one, in every
unfortified Uncontrolled Duchy.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

●

4.23 Pass Impulse
A Power with no card remaining in Hand has no Scheduled Impulse and must pass. However, that Power may still resolve a
Siege (13.2) or spend one or more Resources (16.3) before moving the Impulse marker to the next Power on the Impulse Track.

Powers. However, “Hungry Soldiers Riot” (card 48) may be
played against a Formation of the card player’s choice; any
Formation, whether enemy, Allied, or your own.

Apply the modified die roll result from the Cossacks Table. An
Imperial Flag removed from the map during the Cossack Phase
may not be Intercepted.

Cossack Table (one die)
Modified Die Roll

Result

0–3

No effect

4–8

Remove the
Imperial Flag

4.5 Morale Step

During the Morale Step, the Imperial Camp and then the Tsarist Camp carry out a Morale Check. See 9 and 9.2.

●

If an Event allows something contradicted by the normal
rules of play, the card prevails. Example: “Hapsburg Offensive” (card 67) negates any Morale Level limitation on
Austrian Formations in Russia. “The Forgotten Marshal”
(card 4) allows an Imperial Allied Leader to include French
SPs in their Army.

●

If two Events contradict each other, the most recently played
Event prevails.

●

The card player chooses how to conduct an Event unless a
card’s text says otherwise. A number of cards say: “card
player’s choice”. However, even if these words are not
there it is still the card player’s choice unless the card says
differently. The words “card player’s choice” are there for
emphasis in certain Events.

●

If a Power has more than one Must Play card, it may play them
in any order it wants, or play a non-Must Play card instead.
However, a Power with only Must Play cards remaining in
its Hand must play one of them during its Impulse (unless
spending two Resources to ‘buy’ a card per 16.3).

4.6 Resource Balancing

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Each Power with more than 5 Resources (16) must immediately lose all Resources in excess of 5.
Design Note: this represents siphoning off excess Resources
to sustain the supporting war effort in off-map portions of the
Imperial and Tsarist domains. It also represents (in the case
of the Imperials) the pursuit of the war in Spain and (for the
Tsarists) the need to maintain forces on their southern and far
eastern frontiers.

4.7 Imperial Defeat or Conquest of
Russia

Unless Sudden Death Game End has happened (19.1, 19.2,
19.3, 19.8), players must now check for a possible Imperial
Defeat or Imperial Conquest of Russia (19.5).

4.8 Peace & Victory

If the game has not yet ended and you have finished playing the
second or third Turn, one player is chosen by agreement and
makes a Peace Die Roll (19.6). If the game has not yet ended
and you have finished playing the fourth Turn, the game now
ends and you should work out who has won. See 20.

4.9 End of Turn—Interphase

If the game has not yet ended, the Turn ends with an Interphase
(17). The Power indicated by the Impulse marker on the Impulse Track will take the first Impulse of the next Turn, unless
pre-empted.

5. Cards

Players generate game action by playing cards. Apart from
Must Play cards, each card has a CP value circled at the top left
and an Event at the bottom. You may play such a card either as
an Event or as CPs; you may not use it for both.

Note—It is sometimes possible for a Power to have a Must
Play card at the end of a Turn and discard it or carry it over
unplayed into another Turn. See Interphase rule 17.42.
5.11 Shortages for Builds
Some Events allow a Power to put new Soldiers into play. In
the unlikely event that the Power does not have enough unbuilt Soldiers for the Event, the Power must eliminate enough
Strength Points of Soldiers of that Power’s choice to be able to
place the Strength Points specified by the Event.
“Hapsburg Offensive” (card 67) allows the Austrians to put 2
Strength Points, a cavalry, on the map. If the Nationality only
has one infantry Soldier unbuilt (1 Strength Point), the Imperial
Southern Power must eliminate one of its Austrian Strength
Points on the map so that it can fulfill the Event and place 2
Strength Points. How the Power does this is up to the Power.
Remember that players may ‘make change’ with their Soldiers
at any time.

5.12 Shortages for Removals
Some Events require a Power to remove Soldiers from play,
either directly or in terms of Reinforcements (e.g. card 26,
“Balkan Insurrection”). If the Power does not have enough
Soldiers on the map to match the necessary removals, that
Power must immediately pay to build the Strength Points that
are needed to meet the shortfall, then remove them - even if
this must happen outside of the normal Impulse sequence.
●

Such Soldiers may come from either Builds (6.1) or the Regroup Box (6.2). The Power does this by using any of its
remaining card(s) and/or Resources (16.3).

●

If the Power does not have enough CPs or Resources to satisfy the required loss, put the card and/or Reminder Counter
in front of the Power on the table as a reminder; any remaining removals must be fulfilled at the first opportunity. The

5.1 Events

You make an Event happen by playing a card and declaring the
Event, instead of using its CPs.

Page 10

●

You may play Events against any Power, including an Ally,
unless the card expressly forbids it. Example: “Conspiracy
in Paris” (card 25) can only be played against Imperial

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Power may not put any Soldiers or Leaders on the map until
the outstanding removal requirement has been fulfilled.
A Power could satisfy the losses from Reinforcements, or, if the
removal requirements still remain, the Power could build new
Soldiers with CPs from that Power’s first card play of a new
Turn.

5.2 Responses
5.21 Response Card Events General Description
Response Events have an R within a blue colored
ribbon at the top left of the card below its CP value. Any Power may play a Response during any
Impulse – not just its own. The Power does not
need to have pieces involved in whatever action is
taking place. Resolve Responses in the order they
are played. The most recently played Response prevails when
there is any conflict.

The wording of Events vary, but in some cases later Events will
change an earlier result.
Example: a Power plays the Battle card “A Wasted Day” (card 74)
as an Event, to limit a Battle to a single Round. Another Power
then plays “Another Day of Battle” (card 57) as a Response. This
subsequent Response takes precedence and so Battle continues
for another Round. (Since there was no Inactive Power victor
to the first one-Round Battle, a Scorched Earth Marker may
not be placed.)

5.22 Response Card Play Priority
In all cases, once action has moved on to the next CP expenditure, card play, or die roll, it is too late to play a Response
that will affect the previous action unless the Event played specifically allows it. Gaming etiquette requires that all players
have an adequate opportunity to play a Response before action
moves past that point. You should always play in a deliberate fashion, declaring each CP expenditure, or dice roll for an
Interception or Evasion, to allow players an adequate chance to
respond. Only when a card specifically allows the overturning
or adjustment of a die/dice roll, may such die/dice rolls be affected and their effect influenced (e.g. “Train des Equipages”,
card 73).
If two or more Responses are played simultaneously, the playing Power which is next on the Impulse Track is considered
to have played first. Use this method of dispute resolution, as
needed, in face-to-face play.

To stymie movement of the Army led by Napoleon, the Russian
First Army Power plays “Too Old for This” (card 75) to reduce
the Emperor’s Battle Rating to zero. This is immediately followed by the Russian Second Army Power playing the Response
card “Lost His Way” (card 76). Consequently, Napoleon’s Army
cannot move any more for the balance of the Impulse.

5.3 Battle Cards

Battle Events have a B within a black colored
ribbon at the top left corner of the card below its
CP value. Only a Power with a Formation participating in the Battle may play a Battle card. You
may play any number of Battle cards as Events in
a single Battle (See 12.1). Some Battle cards can
affect Sieges (See 13.3).

5.4 Home Cards

Each Camp has its own set of Home cards. Do not discard used
Home cards. Instead, keep them face up on top of the Camp’s
Reserve Deck [Exception, Imperial Home cards 1 & 9. See
4.21]. They are reshuffled with that Camp’s Reserve Deck at
the start of each Turn or due to the “Imperial Largesse” Event
(card 58). Home cards are never subject to a random draw except through play of “The General Staff” Event (card 92).
Unplayed Home cards must be discarded at the end of a Turn’s
Impulses Phase.

5.5 Command Points (CPs)

When played for its Command Points (instead of its Event), a
card provides CPs equal to the circled gold colored number at
its top. Powers may use CPs to build and remove Flags, as well
as to build and move Soldiers and Leaders. They may also be
used in an attempt to remove Morale Loss Markers: one CP
allows a single die roll, with a result of 5 or 6 removing one
Morale Loss Marker. The Imperial Powers may also choose to
attempt removal of an Attrition Loss Marker in this manner.
A Power may combine or separate CPs to perform more than
one action. A Power does not have to declare in advance how
it wants to spend all of its CPs. Powers spend CPs as they use
them. Powers may not carry over CPs from one Impulse to
another.
A Power plays “This Sanguinary Combat” (card 84) for CPs.
This gives the Power 5 CPs. The Power may, for example, use
3 CPs to move Formations and 2 CPs to build or any other
combination, as long as the player does not spend more than 5
CPs for that card.

5.6 Multiple Card Play

The Active Power may usually play only one card
in an Impulse. However, cards with a “+” symbol
may be played in addition to another card during
the Power’s Impulse. You do not need to declare

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 11

5.23 Special Use of Cards to ‘Emergency Recover’ from
a Second Morale/Attrition Level Deterioration
Any card is considered a Response card, even if the card is not
printed with an “R”, if that card’s CPs are used for either Morale (9) or Imperial Attrition (14.44) recovery after a first Level
deterioration has been sustained. Players may at option, place
the appropriate Morale/Attrition change reminder counter on

5.24 Playing More than One Response Card
Response Cards may also be played in combination. There is
no limit on the number of Responses that may be played.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

A Power may play a Response in any one of several ways: to
interrupt an Active enemy or Allied Impulse, to influence
a Battle or Siege, to reply to another Event, or as a normal
Impulse play.

the appropriate track when a first change occurs so if a second
change happens the potential use of this rule is more apparent.

this multiple card play in advance, and the cards may be played
in any order with the “+” card played first or second. However,
a Power may never play two “+” cards during an Impulse (except as Battle and/or Response Events) unless an Event allows
that Power to play additional cards.
An Event which results from the draw and play of a new card
during the same Impulse counts as a continuation of play of
the card which allowed the new card to be drawn. It is not
considered a distinct and separate Event towards the Impulse
card limit.

6.1 Building

Building costs are shown on the Building Costs Chart. For
example, if you build an infantry Soldier it costs 2 CPs; if
you build a cavalry Soldier it costs 4 CPs. It costs 3 CPs to
rebuild Kutuzov because he has a Command Rating of 6. See
6.3 for where you may place the pieces you build. Rebuilding a
Leader costs half of the Leader piece’s printed Command Rating; ignore any adjustments to the Leader’s Command Rating
because of Events.

Building Costs Chart

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Example One: if a Power plays a “+” card followed by the “No
Peace” Event (Must Play card 36), this allows that Power the
opportunity to play a third card in that Impulse, as long as it’s
not another “+” card. If the third card is another Must Play
card, it allows play of a fourth card, again as long as it’s not
another “+” card.
Example Two: Imperial Army South plays “Hapsburg Offensive”
(card 67) as an Event, in combination with the “Fűr Marie-Louise” Event (card 11, a “+” card). This means it is possible to
move Schwarzenberg (now rated a 3-4 Leader) with four new
SPs, using 8 CPs as if the Austrians were a French Formation.
Example Three: Imperial Army North plays “Men of Bronze”
(card 106) for its CPs. During movement, an Imperial Formation enters a Scorched Earth Duchy. Before resolving Attrition,
Army North plays the “+” card “Depots and Trains” (card 6)
as an Event, in order to place a “Supply Trains” Marker in
the Scorched Earth Duchy and thereby avoid having to resolve
Attrition.

Type

Cost

Soldier

2 CPs per Strength Point

Leader

CPs equal to half of that
Leader’s Command Rating

6.2 Regrouping

Regrouping costs are shown on the Regroup Costs Chart. For
example, if you regroup an infantry Soldier it costs 1 CP; if
you regroup Napoleon it costs 1 CP. See 6.3 for where you may
place the pieces you regroup.

R egroup Costs Chart
Type

Cost

Soldier

1 CP per Strength Point

Leader

1 CP

5.7 Removing Cards

6.3 Putting Pieces into Play

5.71 In General
Some cards specify you must Remove them from the game
when you play them as an Event (4.21). Put such cards aside.
Do not reshuffle them or otherwise return them to play [Exception: Special Must Play Imperial Attrition cards. See 14.62].
Keep the removed card or its Reminder Counter visible, as
some removed cards have an effect on reinforcements, others
may be returned to play, and so on.

6.31 Placing Built Soldiers & Leaders
If a Power builds Soldiers or Leaders, it may only place them
on the map in any of its Home Zones or Controlled Home Keys.
The Imperials are further restricted in that only pieces of an
Imperial Allied nationality may be placed in a Home Key or
Zone of that nationality. For example, only Austrian pieces
may be placed in their two Key Duchies or the Austria Zone.

5.72 Napoleon and The Old Guard
Elimination of the Napoleon (5-8) Leader piece by Attrition
does not Remove the “My Old Moustaches” (card 1) from the
game. That card, along with the “Vistula Legion” (card 10),
may only be Removed as specified on the card itself.

●

Warsaw is a Dual Controlled Imperial Home Key in which
both the North and South Imperial Powers may place
pieces.

●

Moscow is a Dual Controlled Tsarist Capital Home Key in
which both the First Army and Second Army Tsarist Powers
may place pieces.

6. Building & Regrouping

●

If a Key has a Scorched Earth Marker on it, a maximum of
one Strength Point or one Leader (not both) may be built
there each Impulse. However, there is no limit for returns
from the Regroup Box or built Reinforcement pieces during
an Interphase. Remember that pieces placed in a Scorched
Earth Key Duchy must immediately resolve Attrition.

Building means bringing new or previously eliminated Soldiers
or Leaders into play. Regrouping means bringing Soldiers or
Leaders back into play from the Regroup Box. Pieces may be in
the Regroup Box because of Events, Battle and other causes.

6.32 Placing Regrouped Soldiers & Leaders
If a Power regroups Soldiers or Leaders, it may place them in
any friendly Home Duchy or Zone.

Page 12

You may only build and regroup the Soldiers and Leaders provided with the game. Remember that you may always ‘make
change’ using the Soldiers in the game.

Note—

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Regrouped Soldiers and Leaders may also be placed in their
own Power’s unbesieged Friendly Flagged Key Duchies anywhere on the map, if the chosen Duchy
a)	 was formerly enemy controlled, and
b)	 can trace a line of friendly Duchies or Zones to any friendly
Home Zone unoccupied by enemy Formations. This Home
Zone should be on the West map edge for the Imperials
(Prussia, Poland, Galicia, or Austria), and on the South/East
map edges for the Tsarists (Rus, Volga, Saratov, or Ukraine,
but not Moldavia). [Exception: if the Russian First Army
occupies a friendly port, including a besieged friendly
Fortress port, it may trace a line via sea to another friendly
port, which may then trace a line of friendly Duchies back
to a South/East map edge as previously described. Note
that only the Russian First Army may do this, not any other
Power.]
For example, if the Imperial Northern Power flagged Smolensk
and Riga and there is a line of Friendly Duchies connecting
them to Poland, the Northern Imperial Power could place
Soldiers and Leaders into either Key Duchy directly from the
Regroup Box.

●

●

●

A Friendly “Supply Trains” marker (see cards 6 & 13) may
serve as a Friendly Flagged Key
Duchy for the purpose of putting
Regrouped Soldiers or Leaders on
the map. This ability ends when
the “Supply Trains” marker is removed from the map.
A Power’s Deployment Mobilization Centre Marker (‘DMC’, 17.2) makes a non-Key
Duchy equal to a Friendly Flagged Key Duchy
for the purpose of placing Regrouped Soldiers
or Leaders on the map.
A Power may mix Regroup placement options – e.g. place
some pieces in a Friendly Home Key and others in a former
enemy Key which has been now Friendly Flagged – as long
as there are sufficient CPs available. A Power may choose
more than one permitted alternative to putting pieces in a
Friendly Home Key; the only limitations are the number of
CPs and pieces the Power has available.

6.33 Placing Pieces in a Zone (Building or Regrouping)
When placing pieces in a Zone which is already occupied by
a Friendly Formation, add any such new pieces directly into
that Friendly Formation as if placement occurred in a Friendly
occupied Duchy. Any attack after placement is optional and
requires expenditure of 1 CP per 10.72. Any piece(s) placed
into one of its Power’s Zones which is occupied exclusively
by an enemy Formation must immediately attack that enemy
Formation, per 10.71, after all CPs being used for the purpose
during an Impulse are expended.

6.35 Kutuzov
The first time (only) that the Kutuzov Leader is built or brought
into the game by play of a card Event (e.g. “The Old Soldier
Returns”, card 42, or “Peace of Bucharest”, card 27), reduce
any Tsarist Morale Loss Markers in the Holding Box by half
or receive four (4) Morale Gain Markers: Tsarist First Army
Power’s choice.

7. Flags

A Flag is a hexagonal piece representing the inherent garrison
of a Duchy and showing which Power Controls that Duchy.
There can never be more than one Flag in a Duchy. If you put a
Flag in a Duchy you must remove any other Flag in the Duchy.
The original game start owner of a Duchy never places a Flag
there. That Power’s Control is shown by the Duchy’s intrinsic
color and the absence of a Flag.
●

If you remove an enemy Flag from one of your Home Duchies it reverts to your Control.

●

If you remove an enemy Flag from one of your ally’s Home
Duchies, you may choose either to put your own Flag there
– taking Control for your Power – or leave the Duchy without
a Flag so that your ally regains Control (8.1).

7.1 Flagging Duchies

Flagging means putting your Power’s Flag in another Power’s
Duchy to show that your Power now Controls that Duchy. You
may need to remove another Power’s Flag before replacing it
with one of your own. It costs 1 CP to change the Flag in a
non-Scorched Earth Duchy unless a Flag Overrun (12.9) has
happened. (The cost remains 1 CP whether simply placing your
own Flag or removing another Power’s Flag before replacing
it with your own Flag.) Removing a Flag without replacing it
restores Duchy Control to the Power indicated by the Duchy’s
map-printed color.
It costs 2 CPs to Flag a Scorched Earth Duchy. A Scorched
Earth Duchy may be subject to Flag Overrun (12.9).

An Austrian or Prussian Formation, if under the effects of cards
which allow an Allied Army to be considered as French (“The
Forgotten Marshal”, card 4, “Fűr Marie-Louise”, card 11;

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 13

6.34 Building in a Fortress Under Siege
Building Soldiers/Leaders in a Fortress under Siege triggers
an immediate Battle after placement of all Formations during
an Impulse (e.g. through play of more than one card and/or

For example, Riga is besieged by Yorck’s Prussian Army. The
Tsarist First Army player plays “Imperial Largesse” (card 58) to
bring a previously eliminated Kutuzov (4-6) with 2 new Strength
Points and 1 Regrouped Strength Point into the Fortress Duchy.
That uses up the card’s 8 CPs. The player then obtains 6 more
CPs through play of “The Emperor’s Wife” (card 107), a “+”
card, to build 3 more Russian Strength Points. Kutuzov and his
6 Strength Points then attack Yorck.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Note—

multiple CPs), unless the Besieger successfully evades. After
building a Leader through CP expenditure, placing a Formation
in a Duchy through an Event is considered a build. Example:
“Holy Mother Russia” (card 17). If this or other newly built
Formations are compelled to retreat, the Formation is placed
in the Regroup Box, unless it was joined in Battle by another
Friendly Formation which overland entered into the Fortress
from outside that Duchy through play of an offensive interception Event (11.2).

“Prussian Courage”, card 12; “Hapsburg Offensive”, card
67), may place EITHER their Imperial Allied Flag OR the appropriate Imperial French Power’s Flag when seizing control
of a Duchy.
Flag requirements are determined as CPs are spent. Moving
a Formation may make a newly occupied or newly Adjacent
Duchy eligible for Flagging with the next CP expenditure.
Note—The presence of an Allied Formation in an Uncontrolled
Duchy does not affect Flag placement or removal. There are
possible Flag placement restrictions for Imperial Allied Formations depending on Morale Level.
7.11 Flagging an Unfortified Duchy
A Formation in an unfortified Duchy may Flag the Duchy it
occupies.
7.12 Flagging a Fortified Duchy
A Formation in an enemy Controlled Fortress Duchy may only
Flag that Duchy by a successful Siege (13.2).

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

9. Morale

The key points about Morale are as follows:

You may Flag a Duchy as follows:

●

The game tracks the Morale Level for each Camp collectively. So, for example, both Tsarist Powers will always have
the same Morale Level.

●

A Camp’s Morale Level can go up or down (improve or
worsen). However, it may not go up more than one Level
during a single Impulse or Interphase. A Camp’s Morale
Level could, however, both increase and decrease during a
single Impulse, resulting in no overall change. Use the “Morale Change Gain” or “Morale Change Loss” Marker as an
optional reminder when needed.

●

A Camp’s Morale Level can drop any number of Levels
during a single Impulse. However, as of the second or subsequent Morale Level loss during an Impulse, either Power
of the Camp may make an immediate attempt to recover
from that other than first Morale Level Loss by spending
card CPs (5.23, 9.52), Resources, or both. The goal of this
“emergency” expenditure is to remove enough Morale Loss
Markers so that the trigger precipitating the additional lost
Level is removed and the Morale Level loss does not take
place.

7.13 Flagging an Adjacent Duchy
An Army or Army Group in a Friendly Duchy may Flag an
Adjacent “target” Duchy if:
●

there is no enemy Formation or Fortress in the target Duchy;
and

●

there is no enemy Army which is both Adjacent to the target
Duchy and capable of intercepting the Flag placement. An
Army/Army Group which is unable to intercept cannot prevent a change of Flag.

7.2 Morale Loss or Gain For Flag
Placement—See p. 38 of the Play Book and 9.3
Morale Loss Marker Table.

8. Diplomacy
8.1 Diplomacy and Camps

Camps are fixed and players may not change them. A Duchy
or Zone Controlled by another member of the same Camp is
Friendly for Attrition and movement. You may not attack Formations of the other Power in your Camp, or place your own
Flag on your Camp partner’s Home Zone or Home or Controlled
Duchies. You may, however, replace an enemy Flag in a Camp
partner’s Home or any formerly Allied Controlled Duchy with
your own Flag (7). Exceptions: the “dual controlled” Duchies
of Warsaw and Moscow—these may never revert to control by
a single originally controlling Power.

Page 14

8.2 Negotiations

Players may bargain freely but agreements must be made in
public and are unenforceable. Game cards may not be traded,
described, or shown to another player unless an Event allows
this. (See 2.2 and 2.3 for two- and three-player game card
viewing restrictions.) You may not exchange Control of Duchies, although you may agree in advance about the Flagging of
enemy-controlled Duchies yet to be captured. But remember:
agreements are unenforceable.

Example: if the Imperial Northern Power has possession of
Smolensk and a Russian Army commanded by Bagration captures that Fortress via successful Siege, the Russian Second
Army Player could either return the captured Depot/Key to the
First Army, or Flag Smolensk for Bagration’s own Second Army
Power. The decision as to which Tsarist Power should control
Smolensk must be made immediately upon the Fortress’s capture from Imperial control.

A Camp with 6 remaining Morale Loss Markers takes a second
Morale Check during an Impulse. The Camp rolls a five (5),
triggering a second Morale Level decrease. By making an
immediate attempt to recover, the Camp only has to remove
a single Morale Loss Marker to prevent the second Morale
Level loss that Impulse, since rolling a five with 5 Morale Loss
Markers in the Holding Box does not trigger a Morale Level
worsening.
●

Players must make a Morale Check (9.2) in the Morale Step.
A Morale Check may raise or lower a Camp’s Morale Level.

●

Players must also make a Morale Check at certain times
during the game. See 9.4.

●

Camps incur Morale Loss Markers – used in Morale Checks
– for various events detailed later; Morale Loss Markers are
bad for your Camp and Morale Gain Markers are good for
your Camp.

●

There are several Morale Level effects detailed in the appropriate part of each rules section and summarised on the
game map, Player Aid Cards and Play Book.

●

The player controlling the French Northern Army always
carries out Imperial Morale Checks.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

●

The player controlling the Russian First Army always carries out Tsarist Morale Checks.

other Camp. If more than one player is on the winning side,
individual player Victory is determined according to Rule 20.

9.1 Morale Loss and Gain Markers,
and Tracking a Camp’s Morale Level

9.3 Morale Table—See p. 37 of the Play Book
and the Player Aid Card #2

9.11 Morale Loss and Morale Gain Markers
These markers are awarded as shown in the table on the Player
Aid Card and in Part Five of the
Play Book. Place or remove the appropriate marker(s) from the Camp’s
Morale Loss Markers Holding Box
printed on Kutuzov’s map.

9.31 Morale Table Notes
The conversion of disrupts to kills is a moot point if there is a
Rout (12.7).

9.12 The Morale Track
Track the Morale Level for each Camp by placing the relevant
Morale marker on the Morale Display on the map. Each Kutuzov ‘At
Start’ Scenario in the Play Book explains where to place the two Camps’
markers.

b)	 If in a Duchy or Zone in Russia and they must retreat from
it into another Duchy or Zone in Russia which is not already Friendly Flagged (or otherwise are in a non-Friendly
Flagged Russian Duchy the instant “Hesitancy” takes effect); they immediately go to the Regroup Box. For example,
they may have to go to the Regroup Box if an Event removes
a friendly Flag or are Besieging and Morale worsens.

9.2 Morale Check

9.4 Other Times to Check Morale

●

●

If the Camp has no Morale Loss Markers, add 1 to the dice
roll for each Morale Gain Marker the Camp has. On a modified result of 9 or more, raise the Camp’s Morale Level by
one (unless the Morale Level is already at the top), and remove any Morale Gain Markers to a maximum of nine (9).
Any other result has no effect. (As the Morale Check is a
mandatory dice roll, a Camp at the highest Morale Level can
lose accumulated Morale Gain Markers for no benefit.)
If the Camp has Morale Loss Markers, compare the dice
roll to the number of Morale Loss Markers. If the result is
less than the number of Morale Loss Markers, (a) lower the
Camp’s Morale Level by one, and (b) remove all the Morale
Loss Markers up to a maximum of nine (9). Any other result
has no effect.

9.21 Morale Check Effects on Morale Loss Markers
If a Camp has 1-9 Morale Loss Markers and the Camp fails the
Morale Check (i.e. the dice roll is less than the number of Morale
Loss Markers) the controlling player should remove all the Morale Loss Markers. However, if the Camp fails the Morale Check
and there are 10 or more Morale Level Markers, the controlling
player must remove nine (9) of them—no more, no less.
A Camp with 6 Morale Loss Markers takes a Morale Check. If
the roll is 2-5, the Camp’s Morale Level goes down one and all
6 Morale Loss Markers are removed. If the roll is 6 or higher,
the Morale Level stays the same and the 6 Morale Loss Markers stay too.

A change in Morale Level caused by the play of an Event has
no effect on the number of Morale Gain or Morale Loss Markers accumulated within the Holding Box.

As well as during the Morale Step, Morale Checks must be
taken as follows:
●

as soon as a Camp accumulates 9 or more Morale Loss
Markers;

●

after a Battle in which an entire Army or Army Group is
eliminated (Overrun) or Routed and the victor gains one or
more Loot. The defeated Camp must take a Morale Check
if the victorious Camp obtains one or more Resources as
Battlefield Loot (12.10). The victorious Camp may then, at
its option, try to improve its Morale (9.53);

●

when called for by a Card Event. Example: “The Thunder of
Hooves” (card 50).

Therefore, a Camp could be required to check Morale multiple
times from a single occurrence, e.g. if an Army is defeated
through use of “The Thunder of Hooves”, card 50. There could
be as many as three Morale checks: 1) for the Event Card, if
triggered; 2) for accruing nine or more Morale Loss Markers
through elimination of the Army; and 3) for the enemy receiving
one or more Resources as Battlefield Loot. Of course, if the first
Morale Check resulted in removal of all Morale Loss Markers
in the Holding Box, any ensuing Morale Checks would have no
effect and need not be resolved.

9.41 9+ Morale Loss Markers
If a Camp accumulates 9 or more Morale Loss Markers, the
controlling player carries out an immediate Morale Check
using the same procedure as during the Morale Step. Once a
Camp has resolved such a Morale Check – even if it is left with
9 or more Morale Loss Markers – it does not need to take a
Morale Check for having Morale Loss Markers, unless it gets
more Morale Loss Markers and still has 9 or more. (It would
still have to take a Morale Check during the Morale Step, or
as a consequence of the enemy gaining Battlefield Loot.) This
Morale Check takes place when the additional Morale Loss
Markers are placed in the Camp’s Holding Box.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 15

9.22 Below Sauve Qui Peut Morale: Sudden Death Victory
If a Camp’s Morale Level falls below Sauve Qui Peut for any
reason, the game ends instantly in Automatic Victory for the

a) 	They must stay behind if they are part of an Army Group
moving into an enemy space (Duchy or Zone in Russia);

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

To carry out a Morale Check before the Interphase (4.5), the
controlling player rolls 2d6. The procedure is then as follows:

If an Allied Nation (Austria/Prussia) is affected by Hesitancy,
that Nation’s pieces are affected as follows:

A Camp with 7 Morale Loss Markers accumulates 3 more, for
a total of 10 Morale Loss Markers. Fortunately the controlling
player rolls a 10 and passes the Morale Check. The Morale
Level stays the same, and the Morale Loss Markers stay, too.
Later in the Impulse, the Camp gets another Morale Loss
Marker for making an evasion attempt. Now it must take another Morale Check.

It is possible for so many Morale Loss Markers to be accumulated that a Morale Check will inevitably result in that Camp
worsening its Morale by one Level (i.e. by accruing more than
12 Morale Loss Markers). However, only remove 9 Morale Loss
Markers from the Holding Box when a Morale Level changes.
Any excess Markers remain.
9.42 Morale Check After Battle—Morale & Attrition
A Camp must take a Morale Check after a Battle in which
one of its Armies or Army Groups is eliminated (Overrun) or
Routed and the enemy gains at least one Resource as Battlefield Loot. See 12.10.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

The Imperial Camp’s Morale may be affected by that Camp’s
Attrition Level (14.47, 14.48, 14.5).
Extended Example: Morale Resolutions—
It’s the August-September Turn and the Imperials have Overrun a Tsarist Army Group defending Borodino. This results in
their obtaining Loot, per 12.10, and triggering an immediate
Morale Check. This Tsarist disaster has resulted in 12 accumulated Morale Loss Markers and a failure to roll the needed
“box cars”—12 with two dice. (It’s been a tough Turn for the
Tsarists: the Overrunning of the Borodino Army Group added
4 Morale Loss Markers to 8 already in the Holding Box). Nine
Morale Loss Markers are removed from the Holding Box and
three remain. The second Morale Check (required because the
Imperials gained Loot) is passed easily: with just three Morale
Loss Markers remaining, the Tsarists only needed a dice roll in
excess of “snake eyes” (two).
Due to the Overrun, the victorious Imperials are able to proceed to Moscow where they Rout a Tsarist Army defending the
Capital and earn another Resource as Loot. This Battlefield
Loot precipitates a further Tsarist Morale Check. There are
now six Morale Loss Markers in the Russian Holding Box, as
three were just added: two for the Routed Russian Army, and
one for the loss of the Depot. The unlucky Russian First Army
player rolls a 4 with two dice.
However, this loss of a second Morale Level during a single
Impulse may be countered. Had the Russian player rolled a 6
or more, there would have been no loss of Tsarist Morale Level.
The player must immediately negate 2 Morale Loss Markers to
avoid the loss of a second Morale Level during this Impulse. To
do this he spends a 2 CP Card, which is considered a Response
Card for this purpose, and puts it on the Discard Deck. With two
dice only a single 5 is rolled removing one Morale Loss Marker.

Page 16

In desperation, the Tsarists spend a Resource to roll 8 dice. The
eight dice rolled result in two 6s and a 5, allowing the Tsarists
to remove three more Morale Loss Markers. Only two Morale
Loss Markers remain in the Tsarist Holding Box.
The immediate crisis is averted. Two Tsarist Morale Loss
Markers remain in place. Of course, the next Impulse could see
yet another threat to the Tsarist Morale Level.

9.5 Improving Morale

A Camp may improve Morale by getting Morale Gain Markers.
A Camp receives Morale Gain Markers as follows:
●

gaining Loot (12.10);

●

capturing an enemy Fortress (13.51);

●

spending CPs (9.52);

●

spending Resources (16.54);

●

Imperial Change of Attrition Level (14.48); or

●

a Card Event.

9.51 Morale Gain Markers
Each Morale Gain Marker cancels a Morale Loss Marker on
a 1-to-1 basis. If a card Event calls for the removal of a Morale Loss Marker when there are none to remove, Morale Gain
Markers may be placed instead if so stated on the card (e.g .
Tsarist Home Card 18: “Rush to the Colors” does not allow
that option, Must Play card 18: “No Surrender” does.). There
is also a Special Morale Loss Removal for the Tsarist Camp
when initially building/placing Kutuzov (6.35).
9.52 CPs and Morale
A Camp may reduce the number of Morale Loss Markers in
its Holding Box by spending 1 CP for a single die roll. If the
result is a 5 or 6, remove one Morale Loss Marker and return
it to the countermix. If there are no Morale Loss Markers in
the Holding Box, place one Morale Gain Marker in the Box for
each 5 or 6 rolled.
Resources may also be used to remove Morale Loss Markers
(see 16.54). See 16.51 for how to remove Imperial Attrition
Loss Markers.
Remember—Gain Markers cancel Loss Markers on a 1-to-1
basis.
9.53 Opportunities to Improve Camp Morale
In addition to the Morale Step (9.2) when the Impulses part of
a Turn concludes, if Battlefield Loot (Resource[s]) is gained, or
after a Camp Flags a former enemy-held Fortress or Depot, or
captures a Deployment Mobilization Centre (DMC) or as part
of a “Will to Fight?” resolution (19.82); it may choose to make
a dice roll to improve its Morale Level. Note that a maximum
of one such dice roll is available, even if a single Duchy fulfils
two or more of these criteria. (For example, Riga, which is
both a Depot and Fortress, would still only allow a single attempt—even if it also contained an enemy DMC piece when it
is Friendly Flagged.)
If a Camp is already at the highest Morale Level, “Elan du
Guerre”, it cannot make the attempt, nor may it accumulate
more than four (4) Morale Gain Markers at the end of a Turn
(during a Turn, this limit may be exceeded). This Turn end
limit does not apply to the other Morale Levels. However, if
a Camp is below the “Elan du Guerre” Morale Level and has
at least two Morale Gain Markers in its Holding Box, an attempt to Improve Morale may be made. Should a Camp wish
to make the attempt, it rolls two dice. If the result is equal to
or less than the number of Morale Gain Markers in the Morale
Holding Box:

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

a) 	that Camp’s Morale immediately improves one level (e.g.
“Les Grognards” improves to “Marchez Vous”); and

10.2 Stacking

b) 	the Camp removes any Morale Gain Markers, to a maximum
of nine (9), from the Holding Box. Morale Gain Markers in excess of nine remain (maximum of four if “Elan du Guerre”).
Remember—A Camp’s Morale Level may not go up more
than one Level during a single Impulse or Interphase from
where it began. Use the Morale Change Gain Marker as an
optional reminder.

Unlimited Formations can occupy and defend a Duchy or
Zone. However, an Army may move and attack with only as
many Strength Points as its Leader’s Command Rating allows.
The Strength Points must be of the same Power as the Army
Leader and, for Imperial Camp, the same Nationality. Some
card Events allow exceptions. For example, “The Forgotten
Marshal” (card 4) and “The Emperor’s Wife” (card 107). (See
also 10.54 about Leaders stacking.) Multiple Friendly Formations in a Zone must be consolidated into a single stack.

10. Movement

10.3 Entrance

10.1 In General

Leaders and Soldiers may be moved on the Kutuzov map by
spending CPs.
Moving an Army—You must spend one CP for each Duchy
or Zone a Leader enters, whether alone or with Soldiers. Remember that a Leader on its own is considered an Army in its
own right. A move is defined as expending a CP to go from one
location to another (i.e. 2 CPs is two moves).

An infantry and artillery Soldier each cost 1 CP to move one
Duchy, but they must do so separately and therefore may not
enter Battle together. However, if the infantry and artillery are
part of an Army, they may move together as an Army.

10.12 Moving Austrian and Prussian Armies, and Imperial Allied Formations in General
The Austrian and Prussian Allied Armies were reluctant and
at times unwilling participants in the invasion of Russia. To
represent this, an extra CP must be spent to move any Austrian
or Prussian Formation into any Duchy or Zone in Russia that is
not already Controlled by that Allied Army; a French Control
Marker does not negate this penalty. This extra 1 CP cost also
applies if:

10.4 Movement and Attrition
Certain moves incur Attrition:
●

moving over a Marsh Line of March (Imperials only);

●

Forced March;

●

Ambush;

●

Retreats, Interceptions, and Evasions under specific circumstances (these do not cost Command Points);

●

entering a Scorched Earth Duchy.

Resolve any Attrition incurred for these reasons immediately,
according to the rules in Section 14.
10.41 Marsh
Links shown by dashed black lines are Marsh. Regardless of
Duchy control, entering or leaving any Duchy through a Marsh
Line of March incurs Attrition for all Imperial Formations only.
Tsarist Formations treat a Marsh Line of March for interception purposes as Rough in Turns 1 and 2 and Clear in Turns 3
and 4. See 12.42 for Battle effects.
10.42 Forced March
Attrition through Forced March is triggered differently during
Winter and non-Winter Turns:
Turns 1 and 2 (non-Winter)—Formations incur Attrition
through Forced March in the fourth and each subsequent
Duchy or Zone they enter during movement in an Impulse
as a result of spending CPs. You may move Formations or
move a Soldier or Leader alone or as part of the same or a
different Army, but Attrition applies to each Strength Point
and Leader that moves more than three Duchies or Zones
with the fourth and any subsequent CP spent. Place an appropriately numbered March Counter next to a Formation
that has moved, as a reminder of its vulnerability to Forced
March Attrition, in case it moves later during the same Impulse. Note: a Duchy Intercepted, Retreated into or Evaded
into does not count as a Duchy entered for the purpose of
Forced March, because no CPs are spent for these actions.

●

Turns 3 and 4 (Winter)—Formations incur Attrition
through Forced March in Winter as described for Turns 1
and 2, except that Attrition is triggered on entry into the
third Duchy or Zone the Imperials enter by spending CPs; it

a) 	an Army Group (1.1) containing an Allied Army moves into
a Duchy or Zone in Russia that is not already Controlled by
that Allied Army; or
b)	 French Soldiers join an Allied Army through play of “The
Forgotten Marshal” Event (card 4), and there is only a
single French SP with the Allied Army.
An Army Group consisting of Yorck (Prussian) and Ney (French)
would cost 3 CPs to move into any Duchy in Russia that is not
already Prussian Flagged (whether French controlled or Tsarist controlled). Note: per 10.2, Ney could not have any Prussian
Soldier as part of his individual Army, nor Yorck any French
Strength Point(s).

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 17

●

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

10.11 Moving Individual Soldiers
You may move infantry, cavalry and artillery Soldiers on their
own, without a Leader, spending one CP for every Duchy/Zone
the Soldier enters. [Exception: 10.12.] However, you must
move each infantry, cavalry, or artillery Soldier individually.
Soldiers moving without a Leader never move together with
any other piece. Accordingly, two or more Soldier pieces may
never enter Battle together unless part of an Army. A Power
may spend CPs only to move its own Soldiers and Leaders,
unless moving an Allied Army Group.

Pieces may only enter a Duchy or Zone from an Adjacent
Duchy or Adjacent Zone. [Exceptions: Tsarist sea movement
(15), and pieces entering play through an Event, Build, or
Regroup.]

is still triggered by the fourth Duchy or Zone entered by the
Tsarists by spending CPs.
Design Note: this reflects the Russians’ superior ability to move
troops during Winter Turns.
●

Important Reminder: Place the appropriately numbered
‘March Counter’ next to any Formation which moved during an Impulse to keep track of how many Duchies or Zone
which it has entered through expenditure of CP. Entering
a Duchy/Zone through Interception, Evasion or Retreat
does not count for Forced March Attrition purposes. Since
any additional Duchy/Zone moved into after 4 CPs are expended will cause Forced March Attrition, 4 is the highest
denomination of ‘March Counter’ provided.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

10.43 Ambush
Entering an Enemy Duchy from an Uncontrolled or Enemy
Controlled Duchy incurs Attrition through Ambush. [Exception: Fortress Duchies (13.41).]

10.54 Duchy or Zone with Friendly Leader
A Leader may move through a Duchy occupied by a Friendly
Leader. However, if a Leader ends its movement in the same
Duchy as another Friendly Leader, you must designate one
Leader as the Commander of the Army or resulting Army
Group. Replace the other Leader with the appropriate Staff Officer counter and put the Staff Officer with the Commander’s
Army/Army Group. The Staff Officer is considered a part
of the Commander’s Army/Army Group. The Staff Officer
becomes an independent Leader as soon as it is no longer in
the same Duchy or Zone as the Commander. In a Zone, all
Friendly Formations are consolidated into one stack. If there
are two or more Armies in a Zone, they must form an Army
Group (10.6). Friendly Formations in a Zone or Duchy may not
form separate stacks.

10.44 Retreats
Retreat into an Enemy Duchy causes Attrition. Attrition is also
incurred by retreats across a river, across a Marsh Line of March
(Imperial only), or to sea (after a failed amphibious assault, or
a failed Convoy into a besieged Fortress). As applicable, these
principles apply to evasions and interceptions (e.g. evading from
an uncontrolled Duchy into an enemy-controlled Duchy).

10.6 Army Groups
●

10.45 Scorched Earth
Any Imperial or Tsarist Formation entering a Scorched Earth
Duchy incurs Attrition.

a single Power has two or more Armies in a Duchy or Zone,
with more Strength Points in total than any single Leader
present can command;

●

two or more Allied Armies (of any strength) are in the same
Duchy or Zone;

●

through play of a card Event (e.g. “The Old Soldier Returns”, card 42).

10.5 Movement Restrictions

You may not move Leaders or Soldiers through Enemy Formations or Fortresses (13.41).
10.51 Zones
A Formation must stop and end all movement on entering any
Zone. That Formation may not move further through spending
CPs for the rest of that Impulse. Place an ‘Enter Zone Movement Complete’ Marker to indicate such a Formation. Note:
such a Formation may still intercept, evade or retreat during
that Impulse, because these actions do not use CPs.
Formations may move in and out of friendly-controlled Zones
during an Interphase Deployment (17.3).
After a successful Evasion, it is possible for a Formation already in a Zone to remain there without needing to fight a
Battle (10.72).

Page 18

10.53 Duchy with Enemy Fortress
If a Formation enters a Duchy with an Enemy Fortress, the
entering Formation must immediately stop and may not move
any further in the Impulse unless a Siege Overrun occurs
(13.42). Use a “Battle or failed Intercept” marker with the
Siege Resolvable side up as a reminder.

10.52 Duchy or Zone with Enemy Formation
If a Formation enters a Duchy with an Enemy Formation, the
entering Formation must immediately stop and engage in Battle, unless the enemy Formation successfully evades (11.6). If
entering a Duchy with an enemy Formation, the entering Formation may not move any more during the Impulse unless the
Battle is an Overrun (12.8). Use a “Battle or failed Intercept”
marker as a reminder that the Formation may no longer move
or intercept from the Duchy. If a Formation enters a Zone with
an Enemy Formation, it has the choice of immediately initiating a Battle (10.71, 10.72).

An Army Group is formed in the following circumstances:

One Leader must be chosen as the Army Group’s Commander.
The other Leaders are put in the Army Group Holding Box of
his Headquarters Card as Staff Officers. You may have to form
an Army Group after a retreat (12.6), an Interception (11.1), or
an Evasion (11.6).
10.61 Moving Through Friendly Armies
You do not need to form an Army Group while one Army moves
through another Army’s Duchy, but you may choose to do so. A
stationary Allied Army may join the currently moving Army
as it continues its Impulse, but only if the Power controlling
the stationary Army agrees and the stationary Army is capable
of movement. You must form an Army Group if an Army ends
its movement in a Duchy or Zone with another Army and no
single Leader can command all of the Strength Points present.
10.62 Dual-Power Army Groups
If a Dual-Power Army Group cannot agree on a Commander,
the Power with the most Strength Points present within the involved Armies decides. If tied, the most recently Active Power
decides. That Leader remains Commander until a new Leader
eligible to be Commander joins the Army Group, or the Powers agree on a new Commander during that Leader’s Impulse.
When placing Flags, the Army Group places only the Flag of
the Commander’s Power. [Exception: see 8.1.] A Leader and
his Army are not compelled to remain within an Army Group
during his own Impulse.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

10.63 Army Group CP Costs
Regardless of its Commander’s Command Rating, an Army Group
must pay one CP per Duchy or Zone entered for each Army that
moves as part of the Army Group. Note: An Imperial Allied Army
requires one extra CP to enter any Duchy or Zone in Russia that
is not already controlled (Flagged) by that Allied Army.
An Army Group may move as many Strength Points and Staff
Officers (combined) as the Command Ratings of its respective
Army Leaders allow.
Note that a Leader can either be an Army on its own, or part
of another Leader’s Army (as a Staff Officer, thereby counting
against the Command Rating limit).
Kutuzov (Command Rating: 6) and Barclay (Command Rating:
4) could move 10 Strength Points as an Army Group. Each
Duchy entered would cost 2 CPs (1 for each Army). Alternatively, Kutuzov could take 5 Strength Points of Soldiers, plus
Barclay - as his Staff Officer - for a total of 6. They would move
as an Army at a cost of 1 CP for each Duchy entered.

Play Note: Generally speaking, when multiple Leaders of the
same Power are in a single Duchy, each Leader of that Power
other than the Commander should be indicated as a Staff
Officer and treated as part of the Commander’s Army – counting against his Command Rating – until such time as that
Commander’s Command Rating is exceeded. Then another
Leader should be chosen to exercise his own Command Rating
and changed from Staff Officer to Leader status. This Leader
will then command his own Army as part of the newly formed
Army Group.

10.64 Army Group Movement
An Army Group moves during its Commander’s Impulse.

10.71 In a Duchy or Zone with an Enemy Formation
Entering a Duchy with an enemy Formation immediately
causes Battle unless the defender evades (11.6).
Entering a Zone with an enemy Formation gives the moving
Formation the choice of immediately attacking any enemy
occupying that Zone (10.72). The inactive Formation may not
force a Battle without a successful Interception (10.3).
A Battle may not be delayed while another Formation moves into
the same Duchy with another CP expenditure, even if it started
in the same Duchy or Zone with the other moving Formation.
10.72 Into a Zone Already Occupied by a Friendly
Formation
A Friendly Formation already occupying a Zone with an Enemy Formation may attack that Enemy Formation by spending
1 CP. The Enemy Formation then has the option of accepting
Battle or evading (11.6). Hostile Formations which occupy a
Zone are not required to attack each other.
10.73 Multiple Formations Entering Battle Simultaneously From Different Locations
Unless within the Command Rating of a single Leader, Multiple
Formations can only enter Battle together by (a) simultaneous
movement as an Army Group, or (b) multiple Interceptions. For
example, through the “Call for Reinforcements” Event, card 66.

11. Interception and Evasion
11.1 Interception in General

Interception is an attempted response by an eligible inactive
Army or Army Group, either to (a) enemy movement or (b)
placement of Flags through Events, i.e. “Count Rostopchin”
(card 52) and “Cossack Raiders” (card 108). If successful, the
Intercepting Army or Army Group may advance one Duchy or
Zone. Some Events allow a two-Duchy Interception. Example:
“Concentration of Forces”, card 72.
Interceptions are only allowed if no enemy Formation is already the sole occupier of the Duchy.
Important—The Active Formation whose movement into the
Interception Duchy prompted the Interception attempt is not
considered to occupy the Interception Duchy.

All or some of the Armies in an Army Group may move
together if the movement cost in CPs is paid for by the Commander’s Power. A two-Power Army Group can therefore
move twice or more during a single Round, by alternating
the Commander between the two Powers. Every Duchy entered costs 1 CP per moving Army.

If Interception is successful, any applicable Attrition (14) is
applied; the surviving Interceptors must then engage in Battle.
The Battle is fought as if the Inactive Intercepting Formation
was the original occupier of the Duchy or Zone (i.e. terrain
Battle benefits apply to them, if the Duchy or Zone is under
Friendly Control).

●

An Army Group and its component Armies may freely pick
up or drop off Formations of their respective Powers and
Nationalities along its path, so long as each Army keeps to
the Command Rating limits of its Commander.

There is an Imperial Army in Smolensk. There is a Tsarist Army
in Elnya. The Tsarist Power is the Active Power and moves the
Tsarist Army from Elnya to Mstislavl, which is unoccupied and
Imperial Controlled. The Imperial Army in adjacent Smolensk
may attempt an Interception. If successful, the Imperial Army
moves into Mstislavl and there is a Battle. In the Battle it is the Imperial Army which is considered to be the original occupier, and
as Mstislavl is Friendly Controlled the Imperial Army receives
the terrain benefit (+1 die for a Rough terrain Line of March).

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 19

●

10.65 Disbanding An Army Group
A Power’s Formations may leave an Army Group over its Commander’s objections only during its own Impulse, a retreat, or
by intercepting independently of the Army Group.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Kutuzov (Command Rating: 6) and Platov (Command Rating:
4) could also move 10 Strength Points as an Army Group (6
from Russian First Army and 4 from Russian Second Army).
This Army Group would also cost 2 CPs to move (one for each
Army), regardless of each Army’s composition, since two Powers are involved. In this instance, if Kutuzov took 5 Strength
Points of Russian First Army Soldiers, plus Platov – as his Staff
Officer – for a total of 6 and moved as an Army Group, the cost
would remain 2 CPs for each Duchy entered, since two Powers
are involved. Pieces from one Power cannot become part of
another Power’s Army.

10.7 Entering Battle

If another Tsarist Formation was already in Mstislavl, the
movement of the Tsarist Army into Mstislavl would not allow
an Imperial Interception attempt, because there was already an
enemy formation solely occupying the Duchy.

●

+? for the Battle Rating of the intercepting Leader;

●

–1 if the Interception crosses a Rough Line of March Adjacent to the Duchy or Zone being Intercepted into;

●

–1 intercepting via a Marsh Line of March Adjacent to the
Duchy being Intercepted into (Tsarists only, Turns 1 and 2).
Imperials may not intercept using a Marsh Line of March
(10.41).

●

+?/–? for any Event cards used to influence the dice roll. (An
Event may also cancel the Interception.)

11.2 Multiple Interceptions

An Army may attempt Interception during each Impulse until it
either fails an Interception attempt or fights a Battle/Siege that
does not result in an Overrun. Regardless of the outcome, there
may be further Interception attempts into the same Duchy or
Zone, either by other Armies, or through Events, or both.
The Active player may only conduct an Interception during
an Impulse by playing an appropriate Event. This is done after
resolving all Inactive player Interceptions. However, such Interceptions do not affect any terrain Battle effects.

Interception Table (two dice)
Modified Dice Roll

See p. 14 of the Play Book for an Example.

11.3 Interception Restrictions

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

You may not intercept:
●

in response to Evasions, retreats, and Interceptions;

●

into or in a Zone already occupied by an enemy Formation,
unless a friendly Formation is already in that Zone before
the Interception attempt;

●

using Soldiers on their own: they must be controlled by the
Command Rating of a Leader. However, some Events give
Leaderless Soldiers the ability to Intercept as if they had
a Leader with them. This simulated Leader is only used to
resolve the Interception. It does not affect the ensuing Battle.
Example: “Distant Gunfire”, card 109.

●

with an Army that has failed an Interception attempt, or
with an Army or Soldier that is part of an Army Group that
has failed an Interception attempt;

●

with an Army or Soldier that has already fought a Battle or
Siege (other than an Overrun) during the Impulse;

●

using a River Line of March, unless it is negated through play
of an appropriate card Event, e.g. “Over the River”, card 65;

●

using a Marsh Line of March (Imperials only). Tsarist
Armies and Army Groups may intercept using a Marsh Line
of March. Tsarist Formations treat a Marsh Line of March
for Interception purposes as Rough in Turns 1 and 2, and
Clear in Turns 3 and 4.

In addition, a two-Duchy Interception may not:
●

cross a Zone;

●

cross a Duchy occupied by an enemy Formation or enemyheld Fortress;

●

drop off or pick up Soldiers or Leaders.

To resolve an Interception attempt, the owning player rolls
two dice and modifies the result as follows (all modifiers are
cumulative):

Page 20

8 or less

Interception fails

9 or more

Interception succeeds

If the Interception fails—put a “Battle or failed Intercept”
marker on the affected Army or Army Group (or pieces, if a
card Event was used). It remains in the Duchy/Zone in which it
made the Interception attempt. At the end of the Active Power’s
Impulse, the marker is removed and its effect cancelled. Failed
Interception attempts never incur Attrition.
If the Interception succeeds—move the intercepting Army or
Army Group to the Interception Duchy/Zone, and apply any Attrition required. After resolving all other Interception attempts into
the same Duchy/Zone, surviving Interceptors engage in Battle.
Once the dice have been rolled, the intercepting player may not
decline an Interception result.

11.5 Interception and Attrition

An Interception may incur Attrition in the same way as normal movement, except that movement by interception does not
count for the purposes of Forced March. See 10.4.
11.51 Army Groups and Interceptions
If an Army Group attempts Interception, the Inactive Power
must declare which Formations in that Army Group are attempting to intercept before the attempt is resolved. Only the
Army Group Commander’s Battle Rating is used for the entire
Army Group. If successful, any Army or Army Group that it
leaves behind keeps its own interception capability. However,
the Army Group may decline to intercept as a whole, and instead send a lone Army or a smaller Army Group to attempt
Interception under independent leadership. However, once any
interception attempt from that Duchy or Zone fails, all remaining Formations in that Duchy/Zone receive a “Battle or failed
Intercept” marker and therefore lose their interception capability for that Impulse.

11.6 Evasion

11.4 Resolving Interceptions

●

+1 if intercepting into a Friendly Flagged Duchy or Zone;

●

–1 if intercepting from an Enemy Flagged or Uncontrolled
Duchy Adjacent to the Duchy or Zone being Intercepted into;

Result

Inactive Formations may avoid Battle by evading to an Adjacent Duchy or Zone other than the Duchy/Zone from which the
enemy entered. An Army or Army Group may attempt Evasion only once, and the whole force must evade to the same
Duchy or Zone. Evading Soldiers that are not under a Leader’s
command must check individually for each piece.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

[Exception: an inactive Formation already occupying a Zone
may successfully evade and remain in that Zone. The enemy
may again attempt to attack it by spending 1CP, and the Inactive Formation may again attempt Evasion.]

11.9 Evasion and Attrition

Evasion incurs Attrition in each of these cases:
a)	 into an Enemy Controlled Duchy;
b)	 into a Scorched Earth Duchy;

The presence of a “Battle or failed Intercept” Marker on a
Formation does not prevent it attempting Evasion. The Marker
moves with the evading Formation. If such a Formation enters a
Duchy/Zone containing another Army, the evading Formation
would remain separately identified with its “Battle or failed
Intercept” Marker, either appropriately placed in the stack of
pieces, or on those pieces in their Headquarters Card Section.

11.10 Pursuit

Whether it succeeds or fails, an Evasion attempt by an Army or
Army Group results in the evading Camp being forced to take
one or more Morale Loss Markers.

Given sufficient CPs, an Active Formation may:
a) 	pursue an evading Formation into an Adjacent Duchy/Zone
(but not from one Zone to another); or

11.7 Evasion Restrictions

b)	 move in a different direction.
If a pursuing Formation has occupied the Zone from the beginning of an Impulse and spends 1 CP to pursue, or a pursuing
Formation chooses to enter the Duchy/Zone of an evading Formation, the evading Formation may again attempt Evasion.

You may not evade:
to sea;

●

into a Duchy containing either enemy Formations or an unbesieged enemy Fortress;

●

into a Zone containing an enemy Formation, unless the
Zone is already occupied by a Friendly Formation;

●

using a River Line of March.

11.8 Resolving Evasions

To resolve an Evasion attempt the owning player rolls two
dice and modifies the result as follows (all modifiers are
cumulative):

d)	if an Imperial Formation evades across a Marsh Line of
March.

11.11 Evasion and Interception
Sequences

Formations attempting Evasion or Interception must do so before
the Active Power resolves any Attrition incurred by the Active
Power’s movement. The inactive Power may not wait to see the
effect of Attrition before deciding whether to evade or Intercept.
An Imperial Army is moving and the Tsarist player wants to intercept. The Tsarists must resolve their Interception before the
Imperials resolve any Attrition incurred by their own move.

●

–1 if evading from an Enemy Flagged or Uncontrolled Duchy
or Zone;

●

+1 if evading into or within a Friendly Duchy or Zone;

●

–1 if the Evasion crosses a Rough Line of March;

●

–1 if the Evasion crosses a Marsh Line of March (Tsarists
ignore this modifier during Turns 3 and 4);

●

+? for the Battle Rating of an evading Leader; and

An Active Power and its Inactive Power Ally may only conduct
an Interception during the Active Power’s Impulse by playing
an appropriate Event. Such an Event may only be played after
all inactive Power Interceptions are resolved. Other than that,
there is no required order or sequence for Evasion and intercept attempts; the results of one attempt can be known before
declaring another.

●

+?/–? any Event cards used to influence the dice roll. (An
Event may also cancel the Evasion.)

12. Battle
12.1 Battle Events

Evasion Table (two dice)

Any Power with a Leader or Soldier in a Battle may play one or
more Battle Cards to affect that Battle.

Modified Dice Roll

Result

8 or less

Evasion fails

9 or more

Evasion succeeds

If the Evasion fails—the evader does not move and forfeits
any terrain dice (12.2 and 12.4) it would otherwise have had.
Furthermore, the Active Formation gains a Battle die in the
first Round of Battle for each failed Evasion attempt.

For example, a Power with an Army that is part of an Army
Group commanded by one of its Camp partner’s Leaders, or
even a Power with just a single Soldier in the Battle Duchy.

The Active Camp declares all Battle Events first, followed
by the Inactive defender, before any Battle dice rolls are
made. If the Active Camp plays Battle cards requiring any
dice resolution (e.g. card 66, “Call for Reinforcements”),
the Inactive Camp must first play any Battle card(s) of their
own before all such dice resolutions are made.

The evader may not decline an Evasion result once the dice
have been rolled.

●

Any Battle or other Events that affect the number or resolution of Battle dice to be used influence only one Round of
Battle unless explicitly stated otherwise.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 21

●

If the Evasion succeeds—move the evader to the chosen
Adjacent Duchy or Zone. Alternatively, the evader may remain
in a Zone after successfully evading.

See 9.1 and the Play Book for Morale effects.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

●

c)	 into an enemy Fortress Duchy besieged by a Friendly
Formation;

“Militia Levies” (card 24) adds four Russian Battle dice and
adds one “5” disrupt casualty to the Russian’s Battle casualties,
for one Round of Battle only. However, “Naval Support” (card
51) adds two dice for all Rounds of the Battle.

Any Power – whether or not it has a Formation participating in
the Battle – may play one or more Response Event cards (5.2)
that specifically state an effect on Battle.

12.2 Battle Dice

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Resolve Battle by rolling dice. The number of dice rolled is the
total of the following:
●

one for every Strength Point of Soldiers;

●

one for every Leader serving as a Staff Officer side;

●

+? Morale Level Battle Dice Bonus (12.3);

●

+? the Commander’s Battle Rating (this may be modified by
an Event, e.g. “Leader Wounded”, card 71);

●

+? any terrain bonus for the defender, in the first Round only
(12.4);

●

+1 for each failed enemy Evasion attempt, in the first Round
only (11.8); and

●

–1 for each “5” Disrupt Result, if the Battle enters a second
Round (12.53).

12.3 Morale Level Battle Nationality Bonus
Apply this Bonus according to the Morale Table below:

Morale Table
Morale Level

Camp

Effect

Elan Du
Guerre

Imperial

French: +2 Battle Dice;
Austrian/Prussian: +1 Battle Dice

Tsarist

Russian: +2 Battle Dice

Vive
L’Empereur

Imperial

French: +1 Battle Dice

Tsarist

Russian: +1 Battle Dice

Page 22

12.31 Battle Dice and Mixed Imperial Formations
Bonuses for Battle dice only apply if at least 50% of the combined total of the Formation’s Strength Points and Battle Ratings
involved in a Battle or Siege are of the stated nationality. (Use
only the Battle Ratings of Commanders and Leaders present;
Staff Officers are not included in this total, as they are counted
as 1SP each towards the Formation’s total Strength Points.) In
an Army Group or Duchy/Zone occupied by mixed French and
Allied Imperial Formations, the player receives the greater of
the Morale Level bonuses if at least 50% of the total of Strength
Points and Battle Ratings combined in the Duchy are French.
The Imperials have a Morale Level of Elan Du Guerre. Napoleon
and Yorck are in a Napoleon-led Army Group. Napoleon (Battle
Rating 5) has 2 Strength Points of French Soldiers (5 + 2 = 7).
Yorck (Battle Rating 1) has 4 Strength Points of Prussian Soldiers
(1 + 4 = 5). In a Battle, since the French total of Strength Points
and Battle Rating (7) is at least 50% of the total Army Group’s
strength of 12, the Army Group receives the French Nationality
Bonus (+2), giving a total Army Group strength of 14.

12.4 Terrain

Certain terrain types provide Formations which occupy a Duchy
or Zone with terrain bonuses in Battle. An Inactive intercepting
Army is considered to have reached the Interception Duchy first
and may therefore earn a terrain bonus. This terrain bonus is
not affected by any subsequent Active Power Event-facilitated
Interceptions (e.g. “Distant Gunfire”, card 109).

All terrain bonuses require that the Duchy be Friendly Controlled before the Battle is resolved. Control of a Duchy may
not change until after Battle is resolved, including retreats.
Therefore a Formation which has just moved into a Duchy does
not change Control of the Duchy at the time of entry.
There is a Tsarist Formation in Ryazan and an Imperial Formation in Moscow. The Tsarists Control Ryazan. The Imperials
have Flagged Moscow and therefore Control it. The Tsarist Formation moves into Moscow causing a Battle there. The Imperials
Control Moscow at least until the Battle ends. This means that
the Imperials benefit from the terrain bonus, in this case a River,
so they add three Battle dice for the first Round only.

12.41 Rough
If any Formation entered the contested Duchy in this Impulse
across a Rough Line of March, the opposition gains one Battle
die during the first Round of Battle.
12.42 Marsh
If any Imperial Formation entered the contested Duchy in this
Impulse across a Marsh Line of March, the Tsarist opposition
gains two Battle dice during the first Round of Battle.
During Turns 1 and 2, the Imperials gain +1 Battle die in the
first Round of Battle when Tsarist Formations enter a Duchy
across a Marsh Line of March, as the Tsarists treat the Marsh
as Rough. In Turns 3 and 4, the Imperials do not gain any Battle
dice when Tsarist Formations enter a Duchy across a Marsh
Line of March, as the Tsarists treat the Marsh as Clear (frozen).
12.43 River
If any Formation entered the contested Duchy in this Impulse
across a River, the opposition gains three Battle dice during
the first Round of Battle.
12.44 Zone
Any Inactive Power or Allied Army engaged in Battle in one
of its own Home Zones gains one Battle die for the first Round
of Battle. This is cumulative with any of the preceding terrain
effects. Remember, all Friendly Formations are consolidated
into one stack; you may not have multiple stacks of friendly
Formations in a Zone.
12.45 Entrenchments
Entrenchments are extensive but temporary
defenses (e.g. fieldworks). They are represented
by the placement of an Entrenchment marker
on a Duchy or nearby with the red triangle ‘pip’
pointed towards it. Other than those specified by Game Set-Up
instructions, Entrenchments only appear through the play of
Resources (16.6) or Event (e.g. “Masked Batteries”, card 83).
You may only put Entrenchments on a Duchy that has at least
4 SPs or an Army/Army Group of any strength. For example,

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

a Leader piece alone can entrench. Entrenchments may
not be placed in a Zone.
You must remove an Entrenchment the instant fewer than
4 SPs or no friendly Army/
Army Group is in the Duchy
(although that does not negate
the Entrenchment’s effect on
any Round of Battle that just
took place). This includes
cases when the requisite SPs
or Army/Army Group in the
Entrenchment evade, retreat
or are Routed, Overrun or
eliminated through Battle,
Attrition or card play.

Terrain Summary
Terrain

Battle Dice and Other Effects

Rough

+1

Marsh

+2 (inactive Tsarist only)
+1 on Turns 1 & 2; no effect on Turns 3 & 4
(inactive Imperials only)

River

+3 (and incur Attrition if forced to retreat
across)

Home
Zone

+1 (to Owning inactive Power)

Entrenchments

Attackers: –1 Battle die
Occupants: ignore 1 casualty after first Round
Attacker may not Flag Overrun

Other Friendly Formations entering a Duchy with an Entrenchment immediately receive the Entrenchment’s benefits. It is not
possible for some Formations in a Duchy to be in Entrenchments while others are not.

●

the enemy rolls one fewer Battle dice (first Round of Battle
only);

●

an entrenched Formation chooses one enemy-inflicted casualty result to ignore at the end of the first Round of Battle;

●

an entrenched Formation only Routs (12.7) if it suffers five
or more casualties than it inflicts on the enemy;

●

a Flag Overrun (12.9) is not possible. Any excess elimination Battle results are lost without effect.

12.5 Battle Resolution

Losses are simultaneous. “5” and “6” die results inflict casualties. The number of ‘5’s and ‘6’s rolled by each side should be
recorded using the appropriate Camp’s Marker(s) on the Casualty Display on Player Aid Card #1’s “Battleground” section.
●

Each 6 die roll kills (eliminates) an enemy Strength Point.

●

Each 5 die roll disrupts one surviving Strength Point for the
duration of the Battle. A disruption is not considered to affect a particular piece, but players may find it convenient to
flip a Soldier to its disrupted side as a reminder. Disrupted
SPs still count for total Battle dice and are vulnerable to
elimination via Rout (12.7). Additionally, each 5 causes a
–1 Battle die modifier. See 12.53 for an example of how to
calculate Battle dice with disrupted Soldiers.

●

If there are insufficient Soldiers and Leaders to absorb all
casualties, all Kill results must be fulfilled before applying
any disrupts.

In a two Power Army Group, when a French Power takes losses,
those losses must be shared as equally as possible between the
other French Power and any Imperial French Allied pieces that
were engaged in Battle.
An Imperial Army Group consisting of one French Northern
Army under Davout (4-6) and two French Southern Armies,
one under Murat (2-4) and another Austrian Army under
Schwarzenberg (2-4) is obliged to take Kill casualty losses. If 2
losses were sustained, 1 SP each from the Northern Power and
Southern Power would be eliminated, with the Southern Power
free to choose either a French or Austrian SP. If 3 Strength
Points had to be eliminated, a third Strength Point would have
to be chosen. One French Northern, one French Southern, and
one Austrian Strength Point would be eliminated to fulfil the
requirement to equally share the losses.

12.52 Determining the Victor
If all Soldiers and Leaders on one side are eliminated by kills
and the other is not, the eliminated side loses the Battle and
is Overrun (see 12.8). Otherwise, add up the kill and disrupt
results of each side. The side with the most casualties retreats,
unless the Battle occurred in a Zone (see 12.6).
●

If casualties are equal, fight a second Round with all engaged
Formations. New Battle Event cards (including Response
Events that specifically affect Battles) may be played before
resolving the second Round’s dice counts and results.

●

If casualties are still equal after two Rounds, the Active
Formation retreats back to the Duchy from which it entered
the Battle Duchy (12.6). Battles never exceed two Rounds
unless so dictated by an Event. Example: “Victory or Death”,
card 104.

At the conclusion of a Battle, unless an Overrun has happened,
place a “Battle or failed Intercept” marker with the surviving
attackers (Active Formations) and any surviving defenders (Inactive Formations) in their respective Duchies or Zones. This
shows that the attackers may no longer move or Intercept during that Impulse, and the defenders may not intercept. Remove
all such markers at the end of the Active Power’s Impulse.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 23

Remember—You can make change with your Soldiers at any
time. Record casualties by placing/moving the appropriate
Power’s markers along the Casualty Display on the Battleground Chart.

If only Leaders remain and
there are kill results to apply, the Army/Army Group
Commander must be the last
Leader eliminated. The only
exception to this is the Napoleon Leader. This Leader is always the last Imperial piece to
be eliminated.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Any Power engaged in Battle in a Friendly Controlled Duchy
with Entrenchments gains the following advantages, as long as
it has either at least 4 SPs, or its own Army (or an Allied Army)
in that Duchy:

12.51 Distributing Losses
(kill results)
Distribute Soldier losses (not
Leader losses) as evenly as
possible by Power. No Leader
may be eliminated if a Soldier
is available to meet the loss.
The Commander of a multiPower Formation determines
which Power suffers any excess kill.

12.53 Disrupt Results
In the second Round of a Battle, a side that has more disrupt
results than Strength Points and Leaders may still have Battle
dice, depending on its Leader or Commander’s Battle Rating,
Events, and any nationality bonus. Subtract the excess disrupt
results from these bonuses to find the number of Battle dice to
be rolled. Ignore any reduction below zero.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

In other words, add up all the Battle dice the side would normally have, and then subtract the number of disrupts suffered
in the first Battle Round. Remember: disrupt results do not apply to particular pieces but to the overall strength a Camp has
for a given Battle, represented by the number of Battle dice it
rolls.
A French Northern Army Formation under Davout (4-6)
contains 4 Strength Points of Soldiers and benefits from two
additional dice due to the “Naval Support” Event (card 51) and
another two dice due to the “Elan du Guerre” Morale Level.
Davout’s Army suffers 6 disrupt results during the first Round
of a Battle. In a second Round of Battle this Army would roll
6 Battle dice, as follows: 4 (Davout) + 4 (Strength Points) +2
(“Naval Support”, card 51) + 2 (Morale Bonus) = 12, minus the
6 disrupt results = 6 Battle dice.
●

If a Battle goes into a second Round (or more), apply kill
results to disrupted Soldiers before affecting any Leader.

●

Flip disrupted Soldiers to their non-disrupted side immediately after a Battle. [Exception: Rout (12.7).]

12.54 Morale Level and Disrupts
The current Morale Level may affect the severity of casualties
in a Battle/Siege.

Morale Level Effects on Disrupts
Morale Level

Proportion of Disrupts which become
Kills

Les Grognards

1/3

Tu Felix Austria

1/2

Sauve Qui Peut

2/3

round fractions up!

Inflict these kills at the end of the Round of Battle/Siege in which
they occur. Put pieces lost in this way into the Regroup Box.
For example, if the Imperials’ Morale Level is at Tu Felix
Austria and they suffer 5 disrupts, 3 of these become kills. (5 x
1/2 is 2½; round up the fraction, giving 3.) 3 SPs are eliminated
and go to the Regroup Box.
If the same Imperial Morale Level was at Sauve Qui Peut, 2/3
of the 5 disrupts would become kills: 5 x 2/3 = 3 1/3, which is
rounded up to 4. 4 SPs would be eliminated and placed in the
Regroup Box.

12.6 Retreats

Page 24

The victor remains in the Battle Duchy or Zone. If the Battle
was in a Duchy the loser must retreat. If the Battle was in a
Zone, the loser may choose to stay in the Zone or retreat.

If required to retreat, an Inactive loser (defender) must retreat to one or more Adjacent, Friendly Duchies or Zones if
possible.
●

A defending Formation may split up and retreat into more
than one Duchy or Zone.

●

A defender who is unable to retreat to a Friendly or Uncontrolled Duchy/Zone may retreat to any Adjacent Duchy/Zone
that does not contain an enemy Formation, or to a Friendly
Army besieging an enemy Fortress, but incurs Attrition for
doing so (in addition to any other applicable Attrition).

●

A defending Inactive Formation may not retreat to any
Duchy/Zone from which the enemy entered the Battle, nor
may it retreat out to sea.

Unlike Active interceptors, retreating Inactive interceptors do
not have to retreat to the Duchy(s) or Zone(s) from which they
came, because they reached the Battle Duchy/Zone first.
If required to retreat, an Active Camp loser must retreat to
the Adjacent Duchy or Zone from which it entered the Battle
Duchy/Zone (if that Adjacent Duchy/Zone is an enemy Fortress, it must already be besieged by its Camp). If there were
Event-initiated Active Interceptions from more than one Adjacent Duchy/Zone, including Formations from that player’s
Inactive Power Ally, the Active player must choose one eligible
Duchy/Zone for all of its pieces to retreat to.
12.61 Morale Level and Retreats
The current Morale Level may change the Battle result. If the
Inactive (defending) Power’s Morale Level is Sauve Qui Peut,
the Inactive power is considered to have lost the Battle if casualties are tied and must retreat. This would also apply to the
Active Power if it is at Sauve Qui Peut Morale. In the unlikely
event both Camps are at Sauve Qui Peut Morale, only the Active Camp’s Formation would retreat if a Battle results in tied
casualties.
See p. 38 of the Play Book for a Retreat Result’s effect on Morale.
12.62 Retreat and Attrition
A retreat may incur Attrition, which must be resolved immediately. For example: retreating across a river (10.44), entering
a Scorched Earth Duchy (10.45), or Imperials retreating along
a Marsh LOC. Losses incurred from Attrition during a retreat may change the Battle result into an Overrun (12.8),
or turn the retreat into a Rout (12.7)—as happened to the
French during the Winter retreat across the Berezina River.
“Barclay (a 1-4 Leader)’s Russian Army of 4 SP loses a Battle.
The Imperials inflict two Disrupt results upon the Russians
while suffering no casualties themselves. The defeated Tsarist
Army retreats across a River Line of March and rolls five dice
for Attrition. One of those Attrition dice causes the loss of a
single Russian SP. This is the third casualty and it precipitates
a Rout. 2 more Russian SP are eliminated by the two Disrupt
results becoming Rout “Kills”. Barclay and a single SP survive
the river crossing.”

12.63 Formations Unable to Retreat
Formations which are unable to retreat are Overrun; place
them in the Regroup Box.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

12.7 Rout

If the victorious side inflicts at least 3 more casualties than it
suffers (regardless of in which Round they were inflicted, and
including any losses due to Attrition retreat, 12.62), the losing
side suffers a Rout. [Exception: Entrenched Formations only
Rout if they suffer at least 5 casualties more than they inflict.]

The effects of a Rout are as follows:
●

All disrupted pieces on the Routed side are eliminated.

●

A Rout may result in the victor acquiring Loot, causing the
defeated Camp to suffer a possible drop in Morale Level
(12.10).

Note that there are card Events which reduce a Rout to a retreat
(e.g. “Victory or Death”, card 104). When such an Event is
played, only Kill results are sustained by the loser and unless the Event states otherwise, there is neither a roll for Loot
(12.10) nor a possible Morale Loss for Rout.

Note—The Tsarists and Imperials receive a Morale Loss
Marker if one of their Depots is Flagged by the enemy and
the Imperials (only) receive a Morale Loss Marker if one of
their Home Duchies is Flagged by the Tsarists. These are per
occurrence.

12.10 Battlefield Loot and Morale

In any Battle in which an entire enemy Army or Army Group
is eliminated (i.e. Overrun) or Routed, the Power controlling
the victorious Formation must take the opportunity to gain one
or more Resources.
If a victorious Army Group is involved, only the Army
Group Commander is eligible to collect Loot.

●

Roll one die and add to that result the Strength Point value
of Soldiers and Leaders lost by the loser of the Battle (Leaders count as 1SP, whether or not they were Staff Officers.
The Commander is worth 1SP.). Apply the result from the
Battlefield Loot Table. The greater the size of the defeated
Formation, the greater the chance of gaining battlefield
booty, supplies, draft animals, prisoners to be exchanged
and so on, as represented by a Resource.

●

If a Camp acquires Loot, remove one Morale Loss Marker
from that Camp for each Resource taken. If no Morale
Losses accrued, take a Morale Gain Marker instead.

●

If the result on the Battlefield Loot Table causes a Morale
Check, the losing Camp must place that Battle’s Morale
Loss Markers into their Holding Box before taking the Morale Check.

●

After gaining one or more Resources by Loot, the victorious
Camp may attempt to improve its Morale Level (9.53).

●

Some Events can influence the Loot die roll result.

Other Events do not change the Rout result, but may change
the number of disrupt results and therefore reduce the number
of pieces eliminated by Rout. Example: “Men of Bronze”, card
106.
See p. 14 of the Play Book for a Rout result’s effect on Morale.

12.8 Overrun

An Overrun happens if all Formations belonging to one side
in a Battle are eliminated, even if the elimination was due to
failure to retreat or Attrition incurred during a retreat (12.62).
An Active, Overrunning Formation may continue to move with
any remaining CPs. An inactive Overrunning Formation may
continue to Intercept, unless previously marked with a “Battle
or failed Intercept” marker.

12.81—See 9.11 and the Play Book for an Overrun’s effect on
Morale.
12.82 Worst Case Infliction of Morale Loss Markers
Applied
In situations when an Army or Army Group is forced to retreat,
and that retreat either becomes a Rout or Overrun, only apply the worst possible infliction of Morale Loss Markers for
the situation. Only a single Morale Loss Marker result may be
applied.
See p. 14 of the Play Book for an example of how this rule
works.

12.9 Flag Overrun

If the victor inflicts more eliminations in Battle than the loser
can sustain, even if by a single elimination, the victor gains a
free Flag placement (or removal, as applicable) in the Battle
Duchy, unless it is a Fortress or had an Entrenchment which
defensively influenced the Battle. [Exception: in a Scorched
Earth Duchy, Flag Overrun only applies if the victor inflicts
at least two more Battle eliminations than the loser is able to
sustain.]

Note—Certain Events allow the victor to tabulate cumulative
enemy losses for multiple Rounds of Battle when calculating
Loot die roll results, viz. “Another Day of Battle” (card 57),
“Victory or Death” (card 104), and “To the Death” (card 70).
Additionally, in certain circumstances, “To the Death” allows
two Loot die rolls (one for the first Battle, if a Rout, and another
if the second Battle is a Rout or Army elimination). Remember,
even if a Formation is victorious in the second Battle and gains
Loot in both Battles, the losing Camp has the opportunity to
“Emergency Recover” after it incurs a second and any subsequent worsening of Morale Level during that Impulse, in an
attempt to prevent the reduction of Morale Level (9).

12.11 Looting a Deployment Mobilization Centre

A Power which eliminates an enemy’s Deployment Mobilization Centre (DMC) may get a Resource as Loot. Remove a
DMC from the map immediately if it is the only piece in a
Duchy that an enemy Power has just Flagged. If the DMC is
alone in a non-Fortress Duchy, the enemy Power gets 1 Resource as Loot if it rolls a 6 on one die. See 13.52 for DMCs
in Fortresses.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 25

The Imperials inflict 6 eliminations on Wittgenstein with 4 SPs
in Schlavii. This would be a Flag Overrun unless Schlavii was
Scorched Earth, in which case the Imperials would need to
inflict at least 7 eliminations.

See pp. 39 and 37 of the Play Book for the Battlefield Loot
Table and Morale Table, respectively.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

●

Siege Battle cards without having a Friendly Formation present in the Duchy.

13. Fortresses
13.1 In General

Fortresses do not affect Battles, but do affect Duchy Control,
retreat, and movement. Formations are never considered to be
inside a Fortress. A Fortress Controls its Duchy regardless of
the presence of enemy Formations. To Flag a Fortress you must
defeat it by Siege.

13.2 Siege

A Siege is similar to a Battle but with some important
differences.
●

A Power may only play an Event card to influence a Siege if
the card text specifies that it may apply to a Siege.

●

An Active besieger may resolve a Siege only if there is no
enemy Formation in the Fortress Duchy, and the besieging
Army has not already fought a non-Overrun Battle there
during that Impulse.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

●

A Siege may be resolved at no CP cost during the besieger’s
Impulse, even before playing a card or Resource for that Impulse. This may happen even during a Pass option in which
the besieger has no cards and therefore no Impulse except
for the Siege. As soon as it has no cards in its Hand, a besieging Power may place an optional ‘Siege to Resolve’ marker
on its map-printed Impulse Box or near the Fortress, as a
reminder.

13.21 Only an Army May Resolve A Siege
A Fortress is under Siege (‘Besieged’) when a Camp’s Formation is the sole occupant of an enemy Fortress Duchy. However,
the Camp may only try to resolve the Siege and capture the
Fortress if an Army is present. Only one Army may attempt
to resolve Siege at a time. (See 13.36 for Army Groups and
Sieges.) No other Formation may resolve a Siege.
An infantry, cavalry or artillery Soldier, or any combination of
Soldiers without a Leader, may not resolve a Siege. You may use
an optional Siege Resolvable marker (printed on the reverse of
each ‘Battle or failed Intercept’ marker) to indicate Fortresses
which an active Power’s Army could attempt to capture.

13.22 Siege Rounds
A Fortress may be subject to a Siege only once per Impulse,
whether during a Scheduled or Pre-emption Impulse. However,
a Siege may last several Rounds: one Round for each point of
its inherent defence rating. The defence rating of the Fortress
is, therefore, also the maximum number of Rounds it may be
besieged in an Impulse. Remember that only one Army may
conduct a Siege.

Page 26

For example, Königsberg (defence rating: 4) may only be subjected to a maximum of 4 Rounds of Siege.

13.23 Event Cards in Siege
Not all Battle cards are playable during a Siege. Battle card
play is limited to those Battle cards that specifically note they
apply to a Siege. Contrary to normal Battle card Events, the
owning Power of a Fortress defender may play one or more

13.3 Siege Resolution
13.31 Siege Dice
A Fortress rolls dice equal to its defence rating. A Power’s
National Bonus applies to the besieging Army but not to Fortresses. The strength of a Fortress never changes (4 for Riga
and Königsberg; 2 for all other Fortresses). The besieger calculates Battle dice using the same procedure as for Battle (12.2).
Special Rule: Riga—Riga is a unique Fortress when besieged
by the Imperial Camp. To reflect its formidable defensive advantages, any Imperial Army attempting to resolve a Siege
Round against Riga halves its Battle Dice (rounded up). Card
Events are unaffected by this.
Historical Note: Known as the “Gibraltar of the North”, Riga
was situated upon a difficult-to-access peninsula which could be
defended by the Russian (and potentially also the British) Fleet.
Napoleon (5-8), with 8 Strength Points at the Elan du Guerre
Morale Level, attempts a Siege resolution against Riga. Before
resolving the first Siege Round, the French play “Twelve
Pounders” (card 7) and immediately roll 4 dice against the
Fortress. They next play “Naval Support” (card 51). The “Naval Support” card Event adds 2 dice for all Rounds of a Siege.
Napoleon’s Army has 2 dice for Elan du Guerre Morale, 5 dice
for Napoleon’s Battle Rating, and 8 dice for the 8 Strength
Points = 15. This total must be halved because an Imperial
force is besieging Riga, giving 8 (the fraction is rounded up).
With 2 extra dice for the “Naval Support” Event, and 8 for their
Army, the French will roll a total of 10 Battle dice in the Siege’s
first Round.

13.32 Resolving the Siege
A Siege resolution succeeds if (a) a Fortress suffers a number of
6 results (hits) equal to or greater than its defence rating, and
(b) the attacking Power has at least its Army Commander piece
left in the Fortress Duchy after applying all casualties inflicted
by the Fortress. 5 results have no effect against a Fortress.
13.33 Another Siege Round
If a Fortress is not captured after a Siege Round, the besieger
may choose to start another Siege Round with any remaining
undisrupted SPs. However, this is only allowed if (a) the besieger suffered fewer casualties (i.e. 5s and 6s) than it inflicted
hits on the Fortress (i.e. 6s) in the previous Round, and (b) the
new Siege Round will not exceed the limit of one per Fortress
defence rating point (see 13.22). Some card Events also allow
additional Siege Rounds. A Fortress always defends with the
number of dice specified by its defence rating regardless of
how many hits it incurred in previous Rounds.
The besieger may use a die, or the Battleground Casualty
Display on Player Aid Card #1, to keep track of the cumulative
number of 6 hit results accrued during a Siege.

13.34 Besieger Retreat from Siege and Capturing an
Enemy Fortress
Besieging Formations do not retreat except by Event. Example:
“A Wasted Day”, card 74. A Besieging Formation may not be

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Routed, no matter how many cumulative casualties it sustains
compared to the ‘6’ hits inflicted. Besieging Formations are
affected by their Camp’s Morale (12.54). A fallen Fortress is
Flagged at no cost and immediately becomes a Fortress for its
new owner. Hits on the Fortress do not carry over from one
Siege resolution Impulse to the next.
13.35 Siege End
At the end of a Siege, put a “Battle or failed Intercept” marker
on the surviving besiegers, unless it was a Siege Overrun
(13.42). If a Siege Overrun occurred, the surviving besiegers
may keep moving.
See p. 14 of the Play Book for examples of Siege Resolution.
13.36 Army Groups and Siege
A subordinate Army in a multi-Power Army Group may conduct
a Siege during its Impulse, but receives no Leaders, Soldiers,
or nationality bonus from the inactive Power. Strength Points
of the same Power and Nationality which are present but exceed the besieging Army’s Command Rating may replace any
disrupted or eliminated Soldier in the besieging Army during
subsequent Siege Rounds.

13.5 Morale, Sack and Pillage
13.51 Fortress Capture
When a Fortress is captured:
●

the victor immediately removes 1 Morale Loss Marker from
the besieging Army’s Camp. If no Morale Losses accrued
take a Morale Gain Marker instead;

●

the loser, if Tsarist, adds Morale Loss Markers equal to the
Fortress’s defence strength;

●

the loser, if Imperial, adds 1 Morale Loss Marker.

13.52 Sack and Pillage
Design Note: the fall of a Fortress could lead to the capture of
vital supplies, but for besieging Russians also often resulted in
the undisciplined sacking and pillaging of the captured city.

13.4 Fortress Effects on Movement
13.41 Unbesieged Enemy Fortress
Formations may not retreat or evade to an unbesieged enemy
Fortress. This means that a retreating or evading Formation
may not put an enemy Fortress under siege; a retreating or
evading Formation may only enter an enemy Fortress Duchy
if a friendly Formation is already besieging the Fortress. All
forms of movement, retreat, Interception and Evasion from
an Enemy Fortress Duchy must be to an Adjacent Friendly or
Uncontrolled Duchy. (See also 10.5.)
13.42 Siege Overrun
Besieging Formations may not move any further during an Impulse in which they resolve Siege, unless the Siege is a Siege
Overrun. A Siege Overrun happens when:
●
●

the besieging Army inflicts more hits in a single Siege
Round than were needed to capture a Fortress; or
the besieging Army captures the Fortress in fewer Rounds
than the Fortress’s defence rating.

Example One: Königsberg has a defence strength of 4. The besieger will achieve a Siege Overrun if the Fortress is captured
in Rounds 1, 2 or 3.
Example Two: Brest has a defence strength of 2. The besieger
needs to inflict at least 2 hits to capture it. The besieger needs
to inflict at least 2 hits in the first Siege Round to achieve a
Siege Overrun of Brest. If the besieger inflicts 1 hit in the first
Siege Round, he will achieve a Siege Overrun in the second
Round if he inflicts 2 or more hits, because that would be at
least 1 more hit than needed to take the Fortress.
●

If an Overrun occurs, remove any “Siege Resolvable” marker (10.53). If a Siege Overrun did not occur, flip the “Siege
Resolvable” marker to its “Battle or Failed Intercept” side.

Sack & Pillage Table (one die)
Modified Die Roll

Result

5 or less

No effect

6 or more

Success: gain 2 Resources

If the adjusted result is 6 or higher, the besieger gets 2 Resources and:
●

an extra Resource, if there is an enemy Deployment Mobilization Centre in the Fortress Duchy;

●

puts a Sacked Marker in or next to the Fortress Duchy to
show that the Fortress, if recaptured by a subsequent Siege,
does not trigger a roll on the Sack & Pillage Table (because
there’s nothing left to take);

●

if Tsarist, the Formation immediately rolls for Attrition.
The owning player may not use Resources acquired by the
sacking of the just-captured Fortress to reduce the number
of Attrition dice rolls, but may use other Resources for this
purpose. Put any eliminated pieces into the Regroup Box.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Any victorious besieger must roll one die on the Sack & Pillage
Table. The besieger must add one to the result for each Round
fewer than the maximum normally allowed in which the Fortress fell. For example, taking a 2-rated Fortress in one Round
would give +1 to the die roll, while taking a 4-rated Fortress in
one Round would give +3 to the die roll.

Note—Unlike Battlefield Loot, the victor’s receipt of Resources by sacking does not trigger possible adjustment to the
losing Camp’s Morale.
If the adjusted result is less than 6, there is no effect. If the
Fortress changes hands later in the game, the besieging player
rolls on the Sack & Pillage Table using any applicable modifier,
as before.

14. Attrition
14.1 Resolving Attrition

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 27

Whenever the rules (e.g. 10.4) or cards require you to calculate
the effects of Attrition, you must roll a die for every affected
Leader and Strength Point. In Game Turns 1 and 2 you must

lose one Strength Point for each 6 you roll. See 14.6 for Attrition during Game Turns 3 and 4 (Winter).
The Commander, or affected Power if no Commander is present, may choose how to satisfy any losses incurred. However,
you may not eliminate a Leader if Soldiers are available to
fulfil an Attrition loss.
Attrition losses are not considered Battle casualties, unless an
Event specifically says so or an Overrun or possible Rout is involved. A successful Interception (11.1) or Evasion (11.6) may
incur Attrition. For example, evading from an Uncontrolled
Duchy to an Enemy Controlled Duchy triggers Attrition.
However, Interceptions and Evasions are not counted for the
purpose of calculating Forced March, as Interception and Evasion do not cost CPs.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

If only Leader pieces are available, the Army/Army Group
Commander must be the last piece eliminated by Attrition.
However, Napoleon must always be the last Imperial piece
eliminated by Attrition.

14.2 Depots, Scorched Earth, Deployment Mobilization Centres
and Attrition

Halve the number of Attrition rolls a Formation must make if:
●

it is in a friendly Depot Duchy, unless it is a Scorched Earth
Duchy; or

●

there is a friendly Deployment Mobilization Centre (DMC)
in the Duchy.

These effects are cumulative: a Formation in a friendly Depot Duchy with a friendly DMC would halve the number of
Attrition rolls twice. Fractions are rounded up when halving
Attrition for Depots and DMCs. The amount calculated is
the number of dice removed from the Attrition resolution per
14.3.
For example, Moscow is French controlled with an Imperial
Southern Army DMC placed on it. The Napoleon Leader and 8
Strength Points must roll for Attrition. The Imperial Northern
Power would only roll 2 dice for Attrition: 9 halved (for the
Moscow Depot) is 4.5, rounded to 5, that leaves 4 dice; 4 halved
(for the DMC) is 2,
If Napoleon had two Strength Points, the Imperial Northern
Power would roll for Attrition: half of 3 is 1.5 rounded to 2, then
half of 1 leaves a half which is rounded up to one (see 14.3).
Design Note: a DMC Marker represents a concentration of traditional logistical resources. Imagine a multitude of ox-, horse-,
and mule-drawn wagon trains depositing loads of supplies at a
central point. It therefore retains its ability to reduce Attrition
Losses by half in a Scorched Earth Duchy.

Page 28

14.3 Cumulative and Multiple Attrition Checks

All modifiers to Attrition are cumulative. If numerous Attrition conditions apply, calculate the number of dice to be rolled,
then resolve each check for the entire Formation before removing losses.

A Formation of a Leader, three infantry and one cavalry – i.e.
5 Strength Points of Soldiers – forced to take Attrition for two
reasons, would make a single roll of 12 dice: one for the Leader
plus five for the Soldiers, making six, then doubled.
If that same Formation was being forced to check twice while at
the Problematic Level, it would make one roll of 14 dice: one for
the Leader, plus five for the Soldiers, plus one more for the Problematic Attrition Level penalty, making seven, then doubled.

When resolving Attrition, first work out the number of dice to
be rolled (including any extra for the Imperial Attrition Level,
see 14.41) and then work out the applicable reductions. Round
fractions down, but never below 1. This final resolution and
14.4 are the exceptions to the general rule of rounding fractions up in Kutuzov.

14.4 Imperial Attrition Modifiers
14.41 Levels of Imperial Attrition
Imperial Formations may suffer additional losses from Attrition due to the play of certain events. Play of certain cards,
such as “Distribute Rations” (card 78) or “Imperious Hunger” (card 86), affect Imperial Attrition for the remainder of
the game, unless subsequently modified. The level of Imperial
Attrition is noted on the Imperial Attrition Chart. The Chart,
unique to the Imperial Camp, has six levels of Attrition. As
the level of Attrition worsens, because of Events and the accumulation of Attrition Loss Markers (14.42), the Imperials
will need to roll additional dice. Round fractions down when
calculating the additional penalty dice.
An Imperial Army of Davout and four Strength Points of Soldiers must incur Attrition. At a Normal level they would roll
5 dice – one for each Strength Point and Leader – and would
suffer one elimination for each 6 rolled. The Imperial Attrition
Level, however, is at Difficult. This means that for every three
Attrition dice the Imperials normally roll, they must roll one
additional die. This same Formation must now roll 6 dice – one
for each Strength Point and Leader, and one more for the Difficult level (5/3 = 1 2/3, rounded down to 1). Furthermore, if it
is Game Turn 3 or 4 (Winter) they would suffer an elimination
for each 5 or 6, instead of a 6 only (14.61).

There is a correlation between the lower levels of Imperial Attrition and Imperial Morale.
14.42 Imperial Attrition Loss Markers
Put an Imperial Attrition Loss Marker in the
Holding Box printed near the Imperial Attrition
Table each time:
●

a French or Imperial Allied (Austrian or Prussian) Strength
Point or Leader is eliminated by Attrition; or

●

a French or Imperial Allied (Austrian or Prussian) Strength
Point or Leader is eliminated, either in Battle or Siege.

Example: the French lose 3 Strength Points through Attrition.
The French receive 3 Imperial Attrition Loss Markers.

14.43 Triggering A Worsening Imperial Attrition Level
The Imperial Attrition Level may worsen in the Impulses and
the Map Attrition parts of a Game Turn.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

During Impulses—If the Imperials have 9 or more Attrition
Loss Markers, immediately:
●

return 9 Attrition Loss Markers to the counter mix. Any
extras remain in the Attrition Marker Holding Box; and

●

worsen the Imperial Attrition by one Level. For example,
Difficult worsens to Harsh.

●

add the indicated number of Attrition Table-indicated Morale Loss Markers to the Imperial Morale Holding Box. The
addition of these markers may trigger an immediate Imperial Morale Level Change if it results in the accumulation of
nine or more Morale Loss Markers (9.2, 9.4).

On the Map Attrition part of the Game Turn—After
resolving all Attrition die rolls for Imperial Formations occupying non-friendly Duchies/Zones (4.3), the player controlling
the French Northern Army rolls two dice:
If the dice roll is equal to or greater than the number of Imperial Attrition Loss Markers in the Holding Box, there is
no effect.

●

If the dice roll is less than the number of Imperial Attrition
Loss Markers in the Holding Box, the Imperial Attrition
Level worsens by one. The player should then remove
whatever Attrition Loss Markers are in the Holding Box to
a maximum of 9 and return them to the counter mix. Any
Attrition Loss Markers remaining in the Holding Box are
carried over into the next Turn.

14.44 Limitation on Worsening the Attrition Level
If Imperial Attrition should worsen more than one Level during a single Impulse, either Power of the Imperial Camp may
immediately attempt to recover an Attrition Level by spending
CPs (14.46) or Resources (16.51) as soon as Attrition worsens
by a second or greater level. The game mechanism for doing
this is the same as for Morale recovery. Any card played for
this purpose is considered a Response card. See 5.23. Such
“Emergency Recovery” attempts may be made more than once
during a single Impulse, if the Imperials are so unfortunate as
to require them.
Should the Imperial Attrition Level reach the worst Level possible, “Crippling”, and another worsening of Imperial Attrition
is required for any reason, reduce Imperial Morale by one
Level instead. Imperial Attrition cannot become worse than
“Crippling”.
14.45 Limitation on Improving the Attrition Level
Imperial Attrition may not improve by more than one level (see
14.47) during a single Impulse or Turn End. Retain Attrition
Gain Markers (up to a maximum of three) until the next Imperial Impulse, if Imperial Attrition would otherwise improve by
two levels. Exceptions: “Distribute Rations” (card 78) and the
Retreat from Moscow rules (19.7) may allow the Imperial Attrition Level to improve by more than one level.
14.46 Reducing Imperial Attrition Loss Markers
Either Imperial Power may reduce the number of Attrition
Loss Markers in the Holding Box by:

Important—The limit in changes to the Imperial Attrition
Level has the following effects:
●

If the Imperial Camp is already at Normal Attrition Level,
it may carry over a maximum of 3 Attrition Gain Markers
from one Impulse to the next. Any excess Attrition Gain
Markers are lost.

●

The same limit of three Attrition Gain Markers applies at
lower Attrition Levels during an Impulse in which the Attrition Level has already improved by one.

Other than the preceding, there is no limit to the number of Resources or CPs an Imperial Power may spend for this purpose.
14.47 Improving the Imperial Attrition Level
If the Imperial Camp accumulates four or more Attrition Gain
Markers, improve the Imperial Attrition Level by one and remove four Attrition Gain markers.
●

A change in Attrition Level will add the Attrition Table indicated number of Morale Gain Markers which are indicated
by a minus sign and numeral.

●

A change in Attrition Level caused by a card Event has no
effect on the number of Attrition Gain or Attrition Loss
Markers accumulated within the Holding Box.

14.48 Imperial Attrition and Imperial Morale Levels
The Imperial Attrition Level affects the Imperial Morale Level.
At all times apply the limits in the following table.

Imperial Attrition & Morale Chart
Attrition
Level

Morale
Loss
Markers

Maximum
Possible
Morale

Attrition Dice

Normal

–1

Elan du Guerre

1 die for each SP
and each Leader

Problematic

±2

Elan du Guerre

+1 die for every
4 dice rolled*

Difficult

±3

Vive L’Empereur

+1 die for every
3 dice rolled*

Harsh

±3

Vive L’Empereur

+1 die for every
2 dice rolled*

Severe

±4

Marchez Vous

+1 die for every
die rolled

Crippling

+6

Les Grognards

+1 die for every
die rolled

* Round fractions down but never below 1. For example, if the Attrition Level is Difficult and there is 1 Leader and 7 Strength Points,
roll 10 dice: 8 plus 2 extra for the Attrition Level. If the Attrition
Level is Difficult and there is 1 Leader and 1 Strength Point, roll 2
dice: 2 plus 0 extra for the Attrition Level (the fraction is dropped).

spending one or more Resources. (See 16.51.)

Page 29

●

spending one Command Point (1CP) for a single die roll.
If the result is a 5 or 6, remove 1 Imperial Attrition Loss
Marker and return it to the counter mix. If there are no Imperial Attrition Loss Markers in the Holding Box and a 5 or
6 is rolled, put one Imperial Attrition Gain Marker in the
Box instead.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

●

●

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

For example, if the Imperial Morale Level was due to increase
to Elan Du Guerre but the Attrition Level was Harsh, the
Morale Level could not improve. Similarly, if the Imperial
Morale Level was at Vive L’Empereur but the Attrition Level
became Severe, the Morale Level would immediately become
Marchez-vous. These Morale Level limits are absolute and may
not be overridden by spending CPs or Resources on Morale.
Only by altering the Imperial Attrition Level is there a chance
of improving Morale.

Changes in the Imperial Attrition Level also cause the removal
or addition of Imperial Morale Loss Markers. The number of
Imperial Morale Markers to be removed or added is shown on
the map’s Imperial Attrition Level Table. For example, improving Attrition from Crippling to Severe removes 4 Imperial
Morale Loss Markers as soon as the change happens.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

The two ends of the Attrition Track are exceptions to the “+/–”
notation. When the Attrition Level Marker goes from the Problematic to Normal Box, remove 1 Morale Loss Marker. If the
Imperial Level Marker goes from the Severe to Crippling Box,
add 6 Morale Loss Markers.
14.5 Imperial Morale Loss Penalty or Gain For Attrition Level Change(s)
Morale Loss Markers are added into the Imperial Holding Box
when the Attrition Level worsens. Morale Gain Markers are
awarded when the Attrition Level improves. These may be
retained when there are no Morale Loss Markers to remove
(9.51).

Effect—Whenever one of these cards is played in a Winter
Turn (Turns 3 and 4), the Tsarist Camp players alternate selecting any Duchy or Zone occupied by an Imperial Formation
(roll a die to determine which Tsarist player gets first choice).
That Imperial Formation immediately resolves Attrition as in
14.61. Discard each played Winter Attrition card played in this
manner.
Remember—A Special Must Play card only triggers Attrition
after its regular Must Play Event is played.
Note—There is a chance that the Must Play cards “A Great
Blunder” (card 29) or “No Peace” (card 36) may not be selected and played as Events until Turn 4 is underway. In this
instance, these cards would not have their Events played first,
since there is no Interphase or Peace Die Roll at the conclusion of Turn 4. Instead use either card’s first playing as an
Event for Imperial Winter Attrition resolution. This same principle applies to “No Surrender” (card 34) if the Retreat from
Moscow Rule 19.7 has been activated for Turn 4.

15. Sea Movement
15.1 In General

Only the Russian First Army Power may conduct naval operations. There are two types of naval operations: Convoys and
amphibious assaults.

15.2 Convoys

14.6 Winter Attrition
14.61 Effect of Winter Attrition
During Game Turns 3 and 4, the following Winter Attrition
rules apply to both Camps:
●

a die roll of 5 or 6 causes an elimination through Attrition
(not just die rolls of 6).

●

all losses from an Attrition die roll of 5 go to the Regroup
Box.

14.62 Special Must Play Imperial Attrition cards
Some Imperial Must Play cards have a special effect on Winter
Attrition. The relevant cards all have a note referring to this
rule.

Page 30

This includes any special Must Play cards played during
Turn 3.

A Convoy is a naval transport of a Leader or Soldier or both.
A Convoy may carry up to five Leaders, five Strength Points
of Soldiers, or any combination up to five. For example, a
Convoy could carry two Leaders and three Strength Points
of Soldiers.
Convoyed Formations may not combine sea movement with
land movement. They must begin the Impulse in a single
Friendly Port and end their Impulse in another single Friendly
Port.
The Russian First Army Power may send a Convoy once per
Impulse. The cost to send a Convoy is 1 CP for each Leader or
Strength Point in the Convoy.

Where this rule applies to a card, players must put the card to
one side after playing the Event, unless the card says otherwise
(e.g. cards 33 & 36 if Turn 1). You should use the special markers to track each such card so that every player can see which
have been played. For example, “Pay the Devil His Due” (card
33) is an Event which will be reshuffled back into the deck in
Turn 1, but later must be set aside.

A Convoy into a besieged friendly Fortress triggers immediate
Battle unless the defender successfully evades. If the Convoyed
Formation must retreat after the Battle, it suffers Attrition and
goes back to the Port from which it began the Convoy.

●

During the Interphase before Turn 3, when doing Card Preparation for the Next Turn Shuffle and Draw phase (17.41),
return half of all these special Must Play cards to the deck
immediately before play commences with Impulses.

A Convoy into an enemy Fortress Duchy being besieged by
a friendly Formation is an amphibious assault (15.3). Note:
this is only possible through the play of the Event card “Hornblower”, card 21.

●

During the Interphase before Turn 4, when doing Card
Preparation for the Next Turn Shuffle and Draw phase
(17.41), return all available special Must Play cards to the
deck immediately before play commences with Impulses.

15.3 Amphibious Assault

A Convoy of Kutuzov and two cavalry pieces (four Strength
Points) would cost 5 CPs.

An amphibious assault requires the play of the Event card allowing such an assault: “Hornblower” (card 21).

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

To make an amphibious assault, form a Convoy and move its
Formation to an uncontrolled or enemy controlled Port. The
normal Convoy limits of five Leaders or five Strength Points or
any combination up to five apply (15.2).

●

During the Interphase, each of the four Powers receives two
resources.

●

During the Interphase, each Power receives one Resource
for each Depot under its Control. This includes Depots
originally controlled by the enemy. The Imperial Powers
may award the Dual Controlled Warsaw Duchy Depot’s
Resource to either the French Northern or Southern Army.
The Tsarist Powers may award the Dual Controlled Moscow Duchy Depot’s Resource to either the First or Second
Army.

●

Special First Interphase Imperial Resource allocation (before Turn 2), and the Retreat from Moscow Rule (19.7), if
triggered and used by the Imperial Camp (before Turn 4):
for each of these circumstances, the Imperial Camp receives
two extra Resources, for this Interphase only, for allocation
to one or both Imperial Powers at the Imperial Northern
Power’s discretion.

The assaulting Formations first receive fire from the Port’s
shore batteries. The Power which controls the Port rolls two
dice (four if the Port is a Fortress) and any casualties are applied. (Rolls of 5 disrupt and rolls of 6 kill one Strength Point,
as in regular Battle). Surviving Leaders and Soldiers may then
enter the Port. No further shore battery fire occurs.
●

If an enemy Formation is present, it must either attempt
evasion or engage in Battle with the assaulting Formation.
Casualties of the previous shore battery fire add no dice
to any Battle or Siege resulting from the landing, and are
considered casualties from the first Battle Round or Siege
Round.

●

If the surviving amphibious assaulting Formations are
forced to retreat, they incur Attrition and go back to the Port
from which they began their assault.

●

16. Resources
16.1 In General

Resources represent the acquisition of additional supplies and
other materials useful for the prosecution of the war effort
either by routine means or through windfalls. Powers gain
Resources in a number of ways and may use them for a variety
of purposes: to buy additional cards, improve morale, lessen
attrition, acquire Entrenchments, and (Tsarists only) create
Scorched Earth. Alternatively a Power may hoard Resources
for their value as victory points.

16.2 Receiving and Spending
Resources
A Power may receive Resources as follows:

Two Resources in each turn Interphase for having too many
cards (17.43).

●

As specified by Events. For example, a Power playing “Imperial Largesse” (card 58) receives one Resource.

●

One or two Resources through Battlefield Loot (12.10).

●

Two Resources through Fortress Sack & Pillage (13.5).

●

One Resource through capture of an enemy Deployment
Mobilization Centre (DMC) (12.11).

●

One Resource for each extra Tsarist “Will to Fight?” marker
placed on the Turn Record Track after the first one is deployed. (A maximum of two Resources each game are
available in this way. 19.81.)

A Power with no cards may pass in one or more Impulses and
play two Resources during a subsequent Round. However, a
Power may not spend Resources to buy a card and thereby extend the Turn if the last Power with a playable card has already
taken its Impulse.
You may not play two Resources to acquire a card and play a
“+” card in the same Impulse. The Resource play is just like a
“+” card in that it allows you to do one thing more than usual.
Resource Use Examples: Buying Cards
One: In a single Impulse you could use two of your Resources
to draw a card, then play that card or another card, as long as
neither is a “+” card.
Two: You could not play your last card and then use two
Resources to draw and play another card; that would be like
playing three cards.
Three: You have two cards left in your Hand, and two Resources.
You could spend the Resources to draw another card, giving
you three cards in your Hand. You could then either end your
Impulse, or play one of the three cards in your Hand as long as
the card selected is not a “+” card.

16.4 Using Resources to Offset
Attrition

A Power may spend a Resource to reduce the effect of a single
Attrition check, either for itself or its Ally. Each Resource spent
halves the number of dice to be rolled. The reduction is made
after all modifiers and multiples are counted. For example,
spending 2 Resources would halve the number of dice twice.
The Power must spend the Resource(s) before rolling the dice
to resolve the Attrition.
Example: an Army Group must roll 15 dice for Attrition. If 1
Resource is spent, the roll becomes 7 dice. If 2 Resources are
spent, the roll becomes 3 dice.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 31

●

A Power may use two Resources during its Impulse to draw a
non-Home card. Resources do not affect Hand limits or preempt capabilities. Resources can be used instead of a card as
an inherent “+” card (whether the Power has cards or not).

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

If a Siege results from the amphibious assault, or was already
underway before the assault took place, the amphibious assaulting pieces may remain in the enemy Fortress Duchy to
conduct Siege resolution and all other operations, as if they
had entered the Fortress Duchy by an adjoining land Line of
March. Assaulting Formations may also join a Siege which
is already underway against the Fortress.

16.3 Using Resources to Buy Cards

16.5 Other Uses of Resources

You may also use Resources to attempt the following: remove
Imperial Attrition Loss Markers, obtain Imperial Attrition
Gain Markers and thereby improve the Imperial Attrition Level, remove Morale Loss Markers, obtain Morale Gain Markers
and obtain potential to improve a Camp’s Morale Level. They
may be used to construct Entrenchments and, for the Tsarist
Camp only, create Scorched Earth Duchies.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

16.51 Removing Imperial Attrition Loss Markers
Each Imperial Power may spend Resources during its own
Impulse to try to remove Attrition Loss Markers. For each
Resource spent, the Power rolls 8 dice. For each roll of 5 or 6,
remove one Attrition Loss Marker. The Power does not need
to declare in advance how many Resources will be spent, and
may therefore wait to see the result of each Resource’s dice
rolls. A Power may only spend Resources for this once per
Impulse, although this ‘once’ may involve spending more than
one Resource.
For example, the Northern Army Power decides to spend
Resources on attempting to remove Attrition Loss markers.
The player spends 1 Resource but rolls badly. The player may
immediately spend another Resource and apply the results of
another 8 dice rolled. If the second set of 8 dice rolls is also a
disappointment, yet another (third) Resource may be spent and
so on. The point is that once the Imperial Camp stops spending
Resources for this purpose during the Impulse, neither Imperial
Power may repeat the action during the same Impulse (other
than for “Emergency Recovery”).

If one Power spends Resources on trying to remove Imperial
Attrition Loss Markers during its Impulse, this has no effect on
the ability of the other Imperial Power to do the same during
its own Impulse.
16.52 Obtaining Imperial Attrition Gain Markers
If an Imperial Power tries to remove Imperial Attrition Loss
Markers, according to 16.51, and there are no
Imperial Attrition Loss Markers in the Holding
Box, each 5 or 6 die roll instead results in the
placing of an Imperial Attrition Gain Marker in
the Holding Box.
●

Imperial Attrition Loss Markers cancel Imperial Attrition
Gain Markers on a 1-to-1 basis. Simply remove both Markers from the Box when this occurs.

●

It is permissible to have a reserve of Imperial Attrition Gain
Markers, even if the Imperial Attrition Level is Normal, to
a maximum of three Imperial Attrition Gain Markers. However, any excess Attrition Gain Markers are lost at the end
of the Impulse during which they were obtained, and have
no effect.

16.54 Removing Morale Loss Markers
Either Power in a Camp may spend a Resource once during its
Impulse to attempt to remove Morale Loss Markers. The Power
must declare it is spending a single Resource before rolling any
dice. For a single Resource spent, the Power may roll 8 dice.
For each 5 or 6 rolled, remove one Morale Loss Marker.
If there are no Morale Loss Markers in a Camp’s Holding Box,
instead put one Morale Gain Marker in the Box for each 5 or
6 die roll.
●

A subsequent Morale Loss Marker cancels a Morale Gain
Marker on a 1-to-1 basis. Simply remove both Markers from
the Box when this occurs.

●

It is permissible to retain a reserve of Morale Gain Markers,
to a maximum of four Morale Gain Markers if a Camp’s
Morale Level is at the highest Elan du Guerre Morale Level
(9.53). Excess Morale Gain Markers are lost at the end of
the Impulse during which they were obtained, and have no
effect.

16.55 Using More Than One Resource
A Power may spend more than one Resource during a single
Impulse to attempt to remove Morale Loss Markers per 16.54,
and/or to improve their Camp’s Morale Level. Each Resource
is spent individually. The Power does not need to declare in
advance how many Resources will be spent in these ways during a particular Impulse.
16.56 Constructing Entrenchments
A Power may spend one Resource to put an Entrenchment on
any one friendly controlled Duchy occupied by either a friendly Army or Army Group, or at least 4SPs of Soldiers. Such an
expenditure may be made only during a Power’s own Impulse,
and before any Formations move. There is no limit, other than
available Resources, to the number of Entrenchment Markers
placed in this way. See 12.45 for Entrenchment Battle effects.
16.57 Using Resources to Create Scorched Earth
Starting with the Second Round of Turn 1, a Tsarist Power may
spend one Resource at any time during its Scheduled Impulse
(not a pre-emption Impulse) to put a Scorched Earth Marker
on any Tsarist controlled Duchy that is within two Duchies
of an Imperial Formation or Flag. The Duchy need not be
occupied by a Tsarist Formation. However, the Tsarist Power
may not place the Scorched Earth Marker in a Duchy which an
Imperial Army or Army Group is Adjacent to and could theoretically Intercept into (if the Army or Army Group is marked
with a “Battle or failed Intercept” marker, or would be unable
to intercept into the Duchy for any other reason, it may not
prevent placement of a Scorched Earth marker). A Duchy so
marked is known as a Scorched Earth Duchy.

Page 32

16.53 Improving the Imperial Attrition Level
Whenever the Imperial Attrition Level is less than Normal,
if the Imperial Camp accumulates 4 Imperial Attrition Gain
Markers, remove the 4 Markers and improve the Imperial Attrition Level by one, to a maximum of Normal.

Remember—The Imperial Attrition Level may not be increased more than one level during a single Impulse or Turn
End sequence (4.3, 14.45).

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

The Tsarists control Staraya Russa but do not have any Formations in the Duchy. The Tsarists could put a Scorched Earth
Marker in Staraya Russa as long as there is no Imperial Army
or Army Group in Cholm, Novgorod, or Tver capable of intercepting into Staraya Russa. An Imperial Army in Chudovo
could not impede placement of a Scorched Earth marker due to
being separated from Staraya Russa by a River Line of March
(although Imperial Response Home Card 3, “General Elbe’s
Pontooniers”, could change that!).
●

●

Until the Kutuzov Leader is placed on the map, a Tsarist
Power may spend no more than one Resource to place a
Scorched Earth Marker each Scheduled Impulse. However,
there is no limit to the number of Scorched Earth Markers
that may be placed as a result of card Events.
Once the Kutuzov Leader enters play, and no matter what
happens to him after that, there is no longer a limit to the
number of available Resources a Tsarist Power may spend
on Scorched Earth Markers during any Impulse.

16.58 Effect of Scorched Earth
A Scorched Earth Duchy has the following effects.
A Formation entering it, for any reason, must make an immediate Attrition roll (applies to both Imperial and Tsarist
Formations).

●

It costs a Power 2 CPs to Flag a Scorched Earth Duchy.

●

A Flag Overrun remains free of CP cost, but requires the
winner to inflict at least 2 more Battle eliminations than the
loser’s total of Strength Points and Leader pieces (12.9).

●

If it is a Key Duchy, new piece builds are limited to one
Strength Point of Soldiers or one Leader during an Impulse.
There is no quantity effect on pieces being returned to the
map from the Regroup Box (6.32).

16.6 Resources and Victory
At the end of the game, each unused Resource is worth half a
Victory Point (20.2). In games where players have the same
number of Victory Points, the number of unplayed Resources
may break the tie 20.1. Exception: if The Retreat from Moscow
applies (19.7), at the end of the game each unused Imperial
Resource (not Tsarist) is worth 1 Victory Point.

17. Interphase

In this part of the Game Turn players prepare for the next
Game Turn, unless the game has already ended (19). You may
not play Events or make Interceptions during the Interphase.
The Interphase has these main steps:
●

Resources (17.1);

●

Reinforcements (17.2) and Deployment (17.3);

●

Card Preparation for the Next Turn (17.4).

17.1 Interphase Resources

Starting with the Power due to take the next Scheduled Impulse
on the Impulse Track, each Power in turn builds reinforcements from among those Soldiers and Leaders which were
previously eliminated, have not yet entered play, or are in the
Regroup Box. The Power may choose reinforcements from any
combination of those pieces available, as long as the required
CPs are available.

Each Power pays the normal CP cost to build or regroup Soldiers and Leaders during the Interphase. See 6.1 for building
and 6.2 for regrouping.
Powers must place their built reinforcements (6.1) in any one
(only) of their unbesieged Home Key Duchies under their control, or in one of their enemy unoccupied Home
Zones (of the appropriate nationality for Imperial
Allied pieces). Place a Troop Staging Magazine
Marker on the selected Duchy/Zone, to indicate a
Deployment.
Powers placing Soldiers/Leaders back onto the map from the
Regroup Box (6.2) may place these alone or with newly built
pieces in any unbesieged Home Key Duchy, enemy unoccupied Home Zone of the Power, and/or in any friendly unbesieged
Key, Supply Trains or DMC Marker per 6.32. Pieces returning
from the Regroup Box may be placed in multiple sites.
Additionally, each Power receives one Deployment Mobilization Centre (DMC) Marker during
the Interphase before Turn 2, and a second DMC
during the Interphase before Turn 3, for a total of
two DMCs per Power.
●

Any eliminated DMCs from a preceding Turn are automatically replaced during this portion of an Interphase, at a rate
of one replaced DMC per Power each Interphase.

●

A Power may place one available DMC in any friendly controlled Duchy on the map which can trace a line of Friendly
controlled Duchies/Zones back to its Camp’s primary
Friendly map edge: East Edge for the Tsarists and West
Edge for the Imperials. No more than one DMC may be put
in a single Duchy.

●

Deployment Mobilization Centres have an effect on Regroup Builds (6.32), Loot (12.11), and Attrition (14.2).

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

●

17.2 Reinforcements

17.21 Imperial Reinforcements
The two Imperial Powers each receive Reinforcements according to the Imperial Reinforcements Chart:

Imperial R einforcements Chart
Reinforcements to each Imperial Power

Each of the four Powers receives Resources as described in
Rule 16.2 (last three bullet points).

Case

Before
Turn 2

Before
Turn 3

Before
Turn 4

Automatic Reinforcements

16 CPs

10 CPs

6 CPs

Austria only: extra, if Austria
has not become neutral

4 CPs

4 CPs

2 CPs

Prussia only: extra, if Prussia
has not revolted

2 CPs

2 CPs

2 CPs

Page 33

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

●

French Reinforcements may be used for their Allies (Austria/Prussia), but not the other way round.

17.22 Tsarist Reinforcements
The two Tsarist Powers each receive:
●

7 CPs of Russian Reinforcements automatically;

●

1 CP for each Key in Russia the Power Controls;

●

1 CP for each Depot in Russia the Power Controls.

At the end of Turn 1 the Tsarist 2nd Army has lost Minsk and
Brest to the invading Imperials. 2nd Army is awarded the CP
value of Moscow with consent of its Tsarist 1st Army ally, for 2
CPs (Key and Depot), plus it receives 2 CPs for Kiev (Key and
Depot), 1CP for Kharkov, 1CP for Voronezh, 1 CP for Ryazan.
Added to the Tsarist 2nd Army’s Base Reinforcement Rate of 7,
this becomes a total of 14 CPs of Reinforcements.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

●

Russian Soldiers/Leaders may Deploy up to 6 Duchies/
Zones. Roll for Attrition for each Duchy or Zone entered
beyond the initial 6.

●

Imperial Soldiers/Leaders may Deploy up to 4 Duchies/
Zones. Roll for Attrition for each Duchy or Zone entered
beyond the initial 4.

The other rules about Deployment in 17.31 still apply. For example, the limit on what type of Duchy or Zone a piece may
Deploy into or through.
17.33 Deployment Attrition
As well as Attrition for entering each Duchy/Zone beyond the
limits set out in 17.31 and 17.32, each Power must resolve Attrition for:
●

Once a Power finishes placing its reinforcements, it must immediately deploy them before the next Power on the Impulse
Track takes its reinforcements/deployment.

each Scorched Earth Duchy entered during Deployment
(and into which reinforcement pieces are placed); and

●

each Marsh Line of Communication along which Imperial
pieces Deploy.

17.31 In General
Starting with the Power due to take the next Scheduled Impulse on the Impulse Track, each Power in turn, may freely
deploy its pieces from the Home Key Duchy or Zone which
is designated with the Troop Deployment Magazine Marker.
Each Soldier being Deployed is treated as if it temporarily had
a Leader. Carry out the Deployment immediately after placing
reinforcements on the map (17.2). Each Imperial Power may
include its Allied Nation pieces in its Deployments.

17.34 Tsarist First Army Convoy Deployment
The Russian First Army Power (only) may use a Convoy (15.2)
to deploy pieces from a Friendly Port to a Friendly unbesieged
Port, if the Port of departure is designated with the Home Key
Duchy Troop Deployment Magazine marker. As with other Deployments, a Deploying Convoy may not enter a Duchy that an
enemy Army could, theoretically, intercept into. The Russian
First Army Power may not combine this type of Deployment
with any other Deployment.

Deployment is by land, using any combination of:

17.35 No Deployment for Regroup Placed Pieces
Powers may not Deploy pieces from the Regroup Box which
were placed in a friendly Key Duchy/Zone, DMC or Supply
Trains Marker that was not designated with the Power’s Troop
Staging Magazine Marker. These pieces are placed on the map
and are not moved.

17.3 Deployment

a)	 Friendly Duchies, and
b)	 Friendly Zones unoccupied by an Enemy Formation,
which in both cases no Enemy Army could theoretically Intercept into.
Before Turn 2 and Turn 3, Powers may freely Deploy pieces up
to 8 Duchies/Zones. Pieces may Deploy further but must roll
for Attrition for each Duchy or Zone entered after the initial 8.
(See 17.33, Attrition, which applies whether or not the Deployment goes beyond the allowed number of Duchies/Zones.)
During a Deployment:

Page 34

tighter limits on how far each of their eligible pieces may freely
proceed during the Interphase Deployments

●

a piece may not gather Soldiers or Leaders from the Duchies
or Zones it enters;

●

the pieces moving from a Troop Deployment Magazine may
only drop off Soldiers or Leaders (or both) in the Duchy/
Zone from which the Deployment began. However, remember that pieces may be individually deployed.

●

movement does not cost CPs. (Therefore, for example, a
Deployment is immune from the effect of “Mud. Mud, and
More Mud”, card 38.)

17.32 Winter Deployment(s) for the Interphase Before
Turn 4
Due to the extraordinary severity of Winter in the area depicted by Kutuzov, before the start of Turn 4, both Camps incur

17.36 Leader Theatre of War Strategic Transfer
After a Power has completed all of its Deployments, it may
voluntarily eliminate one or more Leaders from anywhere on
the map, as if killed in Battle (except the opposing Camp does
not roll for Battlefield Loot per 12.10). Such Leaders are immediately available for purchase as replacements during the
upcoming Turn (6.1). Exception: the Napoleon (5-8) Leader
piece may not be selected for Strategic Transfer.
Play Note: After a Power completes its Reinforcement and
Deployment, the next Power follows in Impulse Track Order
until all four Powers have completed their Reinforcement and
Deployment. Then go to Card Preparation (17.4). This is different from Wellington but similar to The Napoleonic Wars.

17.4 Card Preparation for the Next
Turn
This part of the Interphase has the following steps:
●

Shuffle and Draw (17.41);

●

Mulligans and Unplayed Cards (17.42);

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

●

Excess Cards (17.43);

●

Home Cards (17.44).

from play you must also remove “Vistula Legion” (card 10)
from play.

17.41 Shuffle and Draw
Shuffle all the cards in the discard pile back into the deck (do
not include the Home cards!). In Impulse Track Order, each
Power draws 5 cards (starting with the Power due to move
next). If a Winter Turn is about to begin, incorporate any eligible Special Must Play Imperial Attrition cards (14.62) into
the deck before dealing the cards.
17.42 Mulligans and Unplayed Cards
In Impulse Track Order, each Power (starting with the next to
move) decides whether to do a Mulligan (2.8) with the newly
drawn cards. Once the Power finishes doing any Mulligans, it
must deal with any unplayed card(s) it has remaining from the
previous turn. After making a Mulligan decision, the Power
must randomly discard half of those unplayed cards from the
previous Turn, shuffle them back into the deck, and then draw
the same number of replacement cards from the newly shuffled
deck. All cards are then combined into a single hand.

●

If “My Old Moustaches” (card 1) has not been removed
from play, give it to the French Northern Army Power and
deal that Power 2 other Imperial Home cards. If that card
has been removed from play, just deal that Power 2 Imperial
Home cards.

●

Give the French Southern Army Power “Battalions du
Marche” (card 9) and deal that Power 2 other Imperial
Home cards.

●

Deal each Tsarist Power 2 Tsarist Home cards. Exception:
in the Interphase before Turn 4, deal each Tsarist Power 3
Tsarist Home cards.

For the new Turn, play continues with the next Power on the
Impulse Track, unless a Power pre-empts.

18. Special Rules
18.1 Points of Omission

18.2 First Turn Imperial Surprise
Attack and Special Free Move To
the Bridges Deployment

The Power then selects the cards it wishes to keep – up to an
allowed hand limit maximum of 6 non-Home cards – and
discards the rest for their CP value in extra reinforcements or
Morale/Attrition Loss/Gain Marker adjustment die roll(s). This
6-card limit reverts to the normal 5-card maximum hand size
the instant a Power’s Hand is reduced to five cards or fewer for
any reason.

19. Ending The Game

●

A Power receiving the CP value in reinforcements loses any
odd CPs if they cannot be used.

For example, for a 5 CP discard, the Power builds two Strength
Points of Soldiers and loses one CP (unless something is available from the Regroup Box, or a die roll is made to remove a
Morale Loss Marker/Attrition Loss Marker).
●

●

The Power must place these reinforcements in Impulse Track
order in any one Friendly Home Key Duchy or Zone. Unlike
regular reinforcements, this placement is not followed by
any Deployment.
A Power may not voluntarily discard a Must Play card for
reinforcements.

17.44 Home Cards
Collect each Power’s discarded Home cards and unplayed Reserve cards. Shuffle them and proceed as follows:
●

See p. 15 of the Play Book for details.

19.1 Sudden Death Game End

The game ends immediately if any of the following happen:
●

Either Camp may win a Sudden Death Victory if its opponent’s Morale Level falls below Sauve Qui Peut (9.22). This
can occur at any time.

●

The Conquest of Russia/Imperial Defeat die roll can end the
game (19.5). Peace die rolls are first utilized at the conclusion of Turn 2 to determine if the game ends (19.6).

In all Sudden Death Victory cases, a game can end at any point
in the Turn. Players may be left with unplayed Cards when this
happens.

19.2 Sudden Death Conquest of
Russia
19.21 Tsarist Will To Fight? – Possible Russian
Conquest
A game can end at any time if Russian Surrender/Imperial Defeat is triggered by a Tsarist Will to Fight? resolution (19.8).
19.22 Special Sudden Death Conquest of Russia Victory
Conditions for Turns 1 and 2
During Turns 1 and 2 only, the Imperial Camp may win an
immediate Sudden Death Victory if:

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 35

Separate “Battalions du Marche” (card 9) and – if not already removed – “My Old Moustaches” (card 1) from the
Imperial Home Cards. Note: if card 1 has been removed

This option is only available for the
Game Turn 1 start scenario.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Illegal errors or plays are considered valid if they go undetected before the next Power reveals a card play.

17.43 Excess Cards
In Impulse Track Order, each Power (starting with the next
to move) declares if it has more than 6 cards. If so, the Power
must randomly discard all excess cards (one or more) in exchange for two Resources. (The number of Resources gained
in this manner is fixed at two; it does not vary according to the
number of excess cards.) Because the choice is random, the
card(s) may be a Must Play card. If this happens you must immediately shuffle it back into the draw deck.

●

both Moscow and St. Petersburg are simultaneously Imperial Flagged at any time; or

●

the Imperials conduct three Russian Conquest die rolls on
a cumulative basis by Turn 2’s Potential Conquest of Russia/Potential Imperial Defeat (19.5) inclusive. Each die roll
must have a chance to result in Imperial Victory to be valid
to achieving this Sudden Death Victory Condition.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Example: Turn 1 results in the Imperials taking St. Petersburg
and having a chance to conquer Russia. The conquest die roll
fails to do so and the game goes on to Turn 2. During Turn 2,
the “Thunder of Hooves”, card 50, Event is used during the
defeat of a Russian Army with the subsequent failed Tsarist Morale Check precipitating a “Will to Fight?” Russian Conquest
resolution (19.82) which does not get the needed die roll. This
constitutes the second cumulative Conquest Die Roll attempt
of the game.

In this part of the turn, or as precipitated by Imperial acquisition of a Tsarist Will to Fight? Marker (19.8), the French
Northern Army Power rolls one die, and applies all the applicable modifiers listed below. This single die roll will determine
if the game ends in the Conquest of Russia or in an Imperial
Defeat. Should a game end in this way, and there are two players in the victorious Camp, they must each calculate Victory
Points per 20 in order to determine the individual winner.

Conquest/Defeat Modifiers
Modifier	
Case
+1	
for each Tsarist Depot under Imperial Control
+1	

if Moscow is under Imperial Control

A third Conquest of Russia die roll, either through a “Will to
Fight?” (19.8) resolution or another Conquest die roll attempt
at Turn’s end (19.5), for which there would be no need to roll as
long as there’s a chance of the die roll resulting in an Imperial
Russian Conquest would constitute fulfillment of this Sudden
Death Imperial Victory Condition.

+1	

if St. Petersburg is under Imperial Control

+1	

if Imperial Morale is at Elan du Guerre Level

+1	

if Tsarist Morale is at Les Grognards Level

+2	

if Tsarist Morale is at the Tu Felix Austria Level

+3	

if Tsarist Morale is at the Sauve Qui Peut Level

From Turn 3 onwards, the Tsarist Camp may ignore these two
Special Imperial Sudden Death Victory Conditions.

+?	

add the Conquest Modifier indicated by the box below
the corresponding number on the current Keys Under
Tsarist Control Track (e.g. if the Tsarists control only
3 Keys, the Conquest Modifier is + 2)

+?	

for any modifiers allowed by the play of certain
Events

–1	

for each Imperial Home Key and Depot not under Imperial Control (e.g. a Neutral Austria is –2; Warsaw is
–2 if under a Tsarist Flag or Uncontrolled).

–1	

if Imperial Morale is at Les Grognards Level

–2	

if Imperial Morale is at Tu Felix Austria Level

–3	

if Imperial Morale is at Sauve qui Peut Level

–1	

if Imperial Attrition is at the Harsh Level

–2	

if Imperial Attrition is at the Severe Level

–3	

if Imperial Attrition is at the Crippling Level

–3	

if Napoleon is not on the map (whether eliminated,
removed or in the Regroup Box)

–?	

for any modifiers allowed by the play of certain
Events

19.23 Special Sudden Death Conquest of Russia in
Turns Three and Four
Starting with Turn 3, the game ends immediately with the
Conquest of Russia if no Keys anywhere in Russia are under
Tsarist Control. Use the Keys Under Tsarist Control Track as
a play aid.

19.3 Sudden Death Imperial Defeat

From Turn 2 onwards, if 14 or more Keys anywhere on the
map are under Tsarist Control after the end of an Imperial
Scheduled Impulse during which a card may be played and is
actually played, the game ends immediately in an Imperial Defeat. Use the Tsarist “Keys Controlled” Marker on the “Keys
Under Tsarist Control” track upon the map’s upper right corner
as a reminder of this status. Players may also optionally use the
Imperial “Keys Controlled” Marker to note how many Russian
Keys are under Imperial control: with the total of both Markers
equaling the 13 Keys of Tsarist Russia.

19.4 Other Ways to End the Game

If there is no Sudden Death Game End, the game will end
whenever the first of the following happens:

●

during the Conquest & Defeat part of the Turn, if one of the
Imperial Powers makes a successful die roll under the rules
for Potential Conquest of Russia (19.5) or Potential Imperial
Defeat;

If the final modified result is 9 or higher and the Imperials
Control Moscow or St Petersburg, Russia is Conquered and
the Imperial Powers win the game.

●

●

during the Peace & Victory part of Turn 2 or Turn 3, by a
successful Peace Roll (19.6);

If the final modified result is –3 or less (–4, –5, etc), the
Imperial Powers are Defeated and the Tsarist Powers win
the game.

●

On any other result, the game continues.

●

if the Peace & Victory part of Turn 4 (20) is reached.

●

Page 36

19.5 Potential Conquest of Russia/
Potential Imperial Defeat

It is possible to accrue so many modifiers that a die roll isn’t
necessary to earn an Imperial Conquest of Russia or Imperial
Defeat result.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Morale Gain Markers are unaffected. If Morale is already at
Elan du Guerre, award the Tsarist Camp a Resource.

19.6 Peace Roll

If Sudden Death Victory, Conquest of Russia or Imperial Defeat has not ended the game by the end of Turn 2 or Turn 3, one
player – chosen by agreement – rolls a die. If the die roll is 6,
Peace is declared and the game ends. If the game ends in this
way, each player calculates Victory Points per 20 to determine:
(a) which Camp wins the game, and (b) which player (if two
played as a single Camp) is declared the game’s individual
winner.
Exception—If someone played “No Peace” (card 36) during
a previous Impulse of the just concluded Turn, do not make a
Peace Roll.

Note—The Peace Die Roll is not rolled at the end of Turn
1 – which means the game may not end in Peace on the first
Turn.

●

Then proceed to the Interphase (17). When each Imperial Power takes its first Impulse of Turn 4, January–February–March
1813:

●

there is a French or Imperial Allied Flag in either Moscow
or St. Petersburg at the end of any Turn; or

●

When playing these 4CP, they must only be used to move
Imperial Formations beginning the Impulse in occupation
of Moscow, St. Petersburg, and/or Kiev. These Formations
must move out of any of these Key Duchies. The CPs may
only be used for movement or Flagging. The end result of
this 4CP expenditure is that no Imperial Formation occupies any of the Keys which are to abandoned (i.e. Moscow,
St. Petersburg, Kiev). If 4 CPs are inadequate to move all
Imperial Formations out of the aforementioned Duchies,
sufficient bonus CPs are awarded to allow Imperial Formations to leave each Key and reach a Duchy adjacent to each
Duchy.

●

the Imperials have obtained at least one Tsarist Will to
Fight? Marker (19.8). Simply obtaining the marker is adequate to trigger this rule’s availability as an Imperial Camp
Option. Place the “Retreat from
Moscow Rule 19.7 Has been triggered” marker on the Turn Record
Track for Turn 3 as a reminder that
rule 19.7 is an Imperial option.

19.71—If the Imperial Camp is eligible for this option at the
end of the third game Turn (October-November-December
1812) and the game does not end in a Sudden Death or Peace
result, the Power controlling the French Northern Army must
make a decision before commencing Interphase activity (17).

●

As soon as an Imperial Formation departs one of these Keys,
any Imperial Flag, DMC, and/or Entrenchment located
there is automatically eliminated and the appropriate Tsarist Power awarded one Resource. This Resource is awarded
the instant no Imperial Formation occupies the Key. The
First Army gets any Resource awarded for St. Petersburg,
the Second Army gets any Resource awarded for Kiev, and
either Tsarist Power may receive the Moscow Resource, at
the option of the Tsarist player(s): if there is a dispute, roll a
die. High roll wins. If tied, keep rolling until there is no tie.

●

A Formation surrounded by Tsarist Formation-occupied
Duchies has no choice but to depart the Key it occupies
and attack one of the enemy-occupied Duchies around it.
If that Imperial Formation is repulsed in its attack, it may
not retreat back into the Duchy from which it departed, but
must retreat to any other eligible adjacent Duchy subject
to the normal rules of inactive Formation retreat. This is
an exception to the usual rule, 12.6. If no adjacent Duchy
unoccupied by enemy pieces is available to retreat into, the
Imperial pieces are considered Overrun as if in Battle and
placed into the Regroup Box.

●

After each Imperial Power’s first Impulse of Turn 4, during
which Moscow, St. Petersburg, and/or Kiev must be abandoned, these three Keys, and any Duchies adjacent to them,
may never again be entered by any Imperial Formation or
Flag.

19.72—The Imperials may either
a) continue the struggle to conquer Russia and win the game
outright, or
b) consolidate their forces with a strategic withdrawal, to make
preparations for a hypothetical second campaign in 1813.
19.721—Continuing The Struggle
If the decision is to persevere with the attempt to Conquer
Russia, the game continues normally with Victory determined
per 20 (unless a Sudden Death victory occurs first). Proceed
with resolving the Interphase before Turn 4, January-February-March 1813.
19.722 Consolidation (“The Retreat From Moscow”)
If the decision is to consolidate in a Strategic Goal Adjustment
to prepare for the 1813 Campaign Season, the following occurs
immediately:
●

The Imperial Camp receives a bonus of two Resources.

●

Tsarist Morale improves one Level. Remove any accumulated Tsarist Morale Loss Markers from the Holding Box.

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 37

If it holds Moscow, St. Petersburg, and/or Kiev, that Power
must accept a non-card provided bonus of 4CP as a mandated ‘plus’ card play. The Power must still play a non-plus
card as usual after this ‘plus’ card play – but may not play
another plus card or use Resources to buy a card.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

●

19.7 Imperial Strategic Goal Adjustment (The Retreat From Moscow)

Important—This rule only comes into effect as an Imperial
Camp option if:

Imperial Attrition improves two Levels (remember to remove Imperial Morale Loss Markers accordingly for each
level changed) and remove all accumulated Imperial Attrition Loss Markers from the Holding Box. Attrition Gain
Markers are unaffected. For each Attrition Level the Imperial Camp cannot improve, they are awarded a Resource (e.g.
if the Attrition Level was “Normal” when the “Retreat from
Moscow” rule is activated, the Imperial Northern Army
receives two Resources).

19.723—In addition, by making this decision, the Imperials
may no longer gain any form of Sudden Death Victory through
the “Will to Fight?” Rule, 19.8. Remember, the Tsarist Powers will each receive three Home cards for the start of Turn 4
(17.44).

19.8 Tsarist Will to Fight—Possible
Imperial Sudden Death Victory

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

19.81 Tsarist Will to Fight? Markers
Whenever the Tsarist Camp’s Morale reaches a Level where
a Tsarist Will to Fight? marker was placed at the beginning of
the game (i.e. one each in the Les Grognards, Tu Felix Austria
and Sauve Qui Peut Morale Track Boxes, 2.5):
●

the Marker causes placement of the “Retreat from Moscow
Rule 19.7 Has Been Triggered” marker to be placed on the
Turn Record Track to indicate that The Retreat from Moscow (19.7) is available as an Imperial option;

●

if the “Retreat from Moscow Rule 19.7 Has Been Triggered”
marker was already placed on the Turn Record Track, the
Imperial Camp receives 1 Resource. This goes to the imperial Power with the fewest Resources at that instant. If tied,
each Imperial Power rolls 1 die and the high roller gets the
Resource (reroll any ties). The Tsarist Will to Fight? marker
is returned to the counter mix.

Once this is done, go to 19.82 to check for a possible Imperial
Sudden Death Victory.
19.82 Possible Sudden Death Game Victory through
Tsarist Will to Fight? Marker
The instant a Tsarist Will to Fight? marker is removed from the
Morale Table Track during an Impulse, the following process
is executed in the sequence indicated:
a)	 Heartened by this occurrence, the Imperial Power whose
Impulse it is, or which last had an Impulse, rolls 8 dice to
remove Imperial Morale Loss Markers per 16.54 except that
a 4,5,or 6 die roll result will remove a Morale Loss Marker
or place a Morale Gain Marker. After applying the results,
if nothing but Imperial Morale Gain Markers are left in the
Holding Box and Imperial Morale has not already improved
one Level during the Impulse, the Northern French Power
may attempt to Improve Imperial Morale (9.53).
b)	 After step a, if Imperial Morale is at least one Level higher
than Tsarist Morale, proceed to step c. If not, the process
ends here.

If a Camp with two players wins a Sudden Death Victory
through the Tsarist Will to Fight? Resolution, determine the
individual winner by calculating victory points per 20.5.

20. Victory
20.1 General

The Imperials can win a Sudden Death Victory in the game by
a Conquest of Russia (19.2) or as a result of a Tsarist Will to
Fight? resolution (19.8).
The Tsarists can win a Sudden Death Victory in the game by
an Imperial Defeat through holding 14 or more Keys (19.3) or
as a result of a Tsarist Will to Fight? Resolution (19.8).
Either Camp wins a Sudden Death Victory if their opponent’s
Morale falls below Sauve Qui Peut.
If the game ends in any other way, the players must work out
the winner using Victory Points. Each of the four Powers
counts Victory Points separately. Compare the total points of
the two Imperial Powers with the total points of the Tsarist
Powers. The Camp with the higher total wins. If there is a tie,
work out the winner according to 20.4.

20.2 Basic Victory Points

A Power receives one-half Victory Point (fractions are retained)
for each Resource it has (Exception: 16.6, 19.7) and 1 Victory
Point for each Key and each Depot it Controls. Controlling a
Key which is a Depot is worth 2 victory points.
There are five special cases:
●

if an Imperial Power Controls Warsaw, each Imperial Power
receives (only) 1 Victory Point from Warsaw. If a Tsarist
Power controls Warsaw it receives both of these VPs.

●

If a Tsarist Power Controls Moscow, each Tsarist Power receives (only) 1 Victory Point from Moscow.

●

An Imperial Power which Controls Moscow receives 2 Bonus Victory Points, for a total of 4: 1 for the Key, 1 for the
Depot and the bonus of 2.

●

An Imperial Power which Controls St. Petersburg receives 2
Bonus Victory Points, for a total of 4 (as above).

●

An Imperial Power which Controls Kiev receives 1 Bonus
Victory Point, for a total of 3.

20.3 Bonus Victory Points

Each of the Four Powers may earn Bonus Victory Points unique
to their position. These are in addition to points earned for controlling Keys and Depots and for possessing Resources.

20.31 French Northern Army
● No Prussian Revolt—The Power controlling the French
Northern Army receives 1 Victory Point if Prussia is not in
revolt.

Page 38

c)	 With Imperial Morale being at least one Level better than
Tsarist Morale, immediately execute a Potential Conquest
of Russia/Potential Imperial Defeat die roll per 19.5. Regardless of die roll modifiers, if a natural 6 is rolled, the
game instantly ends in Imperial Victory! Otherwise, tabulate the die roll as normal except there is no need for the
Imperials to occupy any Russian Capital in order to achieve
Sudden Death Victory. If Russia fights on, this counts as
one Conquest die roll for the 19.22 Sudden Death Conquest
of Russia condition.

Design Note: Yes, it is possible that under unusual circumstance
this die roll could result in an Imperial Sudden Death Loss!
(unless there’s a natural 6 die roll)

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

●

Baltic Ports—The Power controlling the
French Northern Army receives Victory Points
based on the number of Baltic Ports under its
control. There are 10 such ports, indicated by
the anchor symbol. (see Chart below)

20.33 Russian First Army
Austrian Neutrality—The Power controlling the Russian
First Army receives 1 Victory Point if Austria is neutral.

●

Historical Note: The Baltic trade during the time of Kutuzov
was a lucrative source of income. In addition, Russia’s refusal
to close its ports to English commerce was cited by Napoleon
as one of his primary reasons for invading Russia.

20.32 French Southern Army
● No Austrian Neutrality—The Power controlling the
French Southern Army receives one Victory Point if Austria
is not neutral.
●

Pripyet Marshes—The Power controlling the French
Southern Army gains Victory Points based on the number
of Pripyet Marsh Duchies under its control.
There are nine such Duchies: Pinsk (at the
center), and the eight Duchies at the end of the
Marsh Lines of March which emanate from
Pinsk. (see Chart below)

Special Turn 4 Imperial Bonus Victory Points—At the
conclusion of Turn 4, if the game has not ended in a Tsarist
Automatic Victory and the Imperial Camp has elected to Strategically Re-deploy per Rule 19.7 (The Retreat from Moscow),
each Key and Depot on the Imperial side of the border gains
two extra Victory Points to signify Napoleon’s success in securing suitable offensive or defensive positions for the 1813
Campaign Season. For example, Warsaw is worth 6 Imperial
VP. (If two players are in the Imperial Camp this means 3 VPs
for Army North and 3 VPs for Army South). The Tsarist VP
value for these Keys remains unchanged. Additionally, each
accumulated Imperial Resource is worth 1VP (rather than ½
VP).

Prussian Revolt—The Power controlling the Russian First
Army receives 1 Victory Point if Prussia has revolted.

●

Baltic Ports—The Power controlling the Russian First
Army receives Victory Points based on the number of Baltic
Ports under its control. There are 10 such ports, indicated by
the anchor symbol. The quantity of bonus points depends on
the number of those ports under the control of the Russian
First Army. (see Chart below)

20.34 Russian Second Army
Austrian Neutrality—The Power controlling the Russian
Second Army receives 1 Victory Point if Austria is neutral.

●

●

Pripyet Marshes—The Power controlling the Russian Second Army receives Victory Points based on the number of
Pripyet Marsh Duchies under its control. (see Chart below)

20.4 Tie-Breakers

After all points and bonus points are accumulated, if there is
still a tie between the Tsarists and the Imperials, Victory goes
to the Camp with the greater number of Resources.
●

If there is still a tie, Victory goes to the Camp with the
higher Morale Level.

●

If there is still a tie (because the Morale Levels are the same),
check the Imperial Attrition Chart. If Imperial Attrition is at
the Severe or Crippling level, the Tsarists win.

●

If the game is still tied, i.e. both Camps have the same
Morale and the Imperials are not at Severe or Crippling Attrition Level, the Imperial Camp wins.

20.5 Individual Victory

If there are two players on the winning side, the players on that
side should work out their individual Victory Points totals: the
player on that side with the higher total of victory points wins.
If there is a tie in Victory Points, the player with the greater
number of resources wins. If the result is still tied, then the
Power listed later in the Impulse Track Order wins.

KUTUzOV — Rule Book

Historical Note: The Pripyet Marshes were not only rich in
resources but were hiding places for bandits, Cossacks, black
marketeers, rebels, river pirates and all manner of scum and
villainy….as well as having an influence on the Balkan Gateway. Domination of the cities, towns, and trade routes in and
around the great Marshes was considered vital for the security
of whichever empire would rule the area, whether it be Imperial French, Austrian, Tsarist or Polish.

●

In the Split Personality game (2.33), the victory rules work as
previously described: the winner will be a single Power of the
winning side (i.e. a single player).

See the Play Book for an extended example of how to calculate
these Victory Points.

Baltic Port Bonus VP Chart

Pripyet Marsh Bonus VP Chart
Bonus VPs

Bonus VPs

1 or 2

0

1 to 4

0

3 or 4

1

5 or 6

1

5 or 6

2

7 or 8

2

7 or 8

3

9 or 10

3

all 9

4

© 2008 GMT Games, LLC

Page 39

Marsh Duchies Controlled

Ports Controlled

INDEX
Allied Nations: Definition: 1.12
Attrition

Ambush: 10.43; Cumulative: 14.3;
Definition: 4.3; Deployment: 17.33;
Depots: 14.2; DMC: 14.2; Evasion:
11.9; Forced March: 10.42; Imperial Attrition Gain Markers: 16.52;
Imperial Attrition Level: 14.4;
Imperial Attrition Level and Morale:
14.48, 14.5; Imperial Attrition Level
Improving: 14.45, 14.47, 16.53;
Imperial Attrition Level Worsening: 14.43, 14.44; Imperial Attrition
Loss Markers: 14.42, 14.46, 16.51;
Interception: 11.5; Marsh: 10.41;
Movement: 10.4; Multiple: 14.3;
Resolving: 14.1, 14.3; Retreats:
10.44, 12.62; Scorched Earth: 10.45,
14.2, 16.58; Winter: 14.6

Army: Definition: 1.62
Army Group

Definition: 1.63, 10.6; CP Costs:
10.63; Disbanding: 10.65; Dual
Power: 10.62; Interception by 11.51;
Movement: 10.64; Moving through
Friendly Armies: 10.61; Siege:
13.36

Battle

Dice: 12.2, 12.3; Disrupts: 12.5,
12.53, 12.54; Entering: 10.7;
Entrenchment: 12.45; Events: 12.1;
Flag Overrun: 12.9, 16.58; Kills:
12.5, 12.51; Loot: 12.10, 12.11;
Marsh: 12.42; Morale Level Battle
Nationality Bonus: 12.3; Overrun:
12.8, 12.10; Overrun and Sieges:
13.42; Resolution: 12.5; Retreats:
12.6; Retreats and Attrition: 12.62;
Retreats and Besieging Formations:
13.34; Retreats and Morale Level:
12.61; River: 12.43; Rough: 12.41;
Rout: 12.7, 12.10; Rout and Besieging Formations: 13.34; Terrain:
12.44; Victor: 12.52; Zone: 12.44

Battleground Chart: Definition:
1.8
Building

Definition: 6, 6.1; Fortress under
Siege: 6.34; Kutuzov: 6.35; Placing:
6.31, 6.33; Scorched Earth Effects:
16.58

Camps

Definition: 1.11; Diplomacy: 8.1

Capital: 1.21; see Duchies
Cards

“+” Symbol: 5.6; Battle Cards: 5.3,
12.1; Battle Cards and Siege: 13.23;
Belong to a Power: 2.7; Command
Point Value: 1.10, 5.5; Definition: 5;
Events: 5.1; Excess: 17.43; Home
Cards: 1.10, 5.4, 17.44; Mulligans:
2.8; Multiple Play: 5.6, 5.24; Must
Play: 4.21, 5.1; Played & Discarded:

GMT Games, LLC

4.21; Preparation for Next Turn:
17.4; Removing: 5.7; Responses:
5.2; Responses and Priority: 5.22;
Shuffle and Draw: 17.41; Special
Must Play Imperial Attrition Cards:
14.62; Unplayed: 17.42

Clear: 1.22; see Lines of March
Command Points (CPs)

Building Costs: 6.1; Event instead
of: 5.1; Flagging Costs: 7.1; For
Imperial Reinforcements: 17.21; For
Tsarist Reinforcements: 17.22; From
Cards: 1.10, 5; From Discards: 17.43;
Improving Morale: 9.52; Movement:
10.1: Reducing Imperial Attrition
Loss Markers: 14.46; Regroup Costs:
6.2; Use of: 5.5

Control

Duchy: 3.1; Zone: 3.2

Cossacks: Definition: 4.4
Deployment: 17.3; see Reinforcements
Depot: 1.21; see Duchies
Diplomacy
Camps: 8.1; Negotiations: 8.2

Duchies

Control: 3.1; Definition: 1.21

Evasion

Attrition: 11.9; Definition: 11.6; Interception and: 11.11; Pursuit: 11.10;
Restrictions: 11.7; Resolving: 11.8

Events

After Playing: 4.21; Build Shortages:
5.11; General: 1.10, 5.1; Removal
Shortages: 5.12

Flags

Adjacent Duchy: 7.12; CP Costs:
7.1; Definition: 1.7, 7; Fortified
Duchy: 7.12; Imperial or Imperial
Allied Flag in Moscow or St Petersburg: 19.7; Morale Loss or Gain:
7.2; Overrun: 12.9, 16.58; Placing:
7.1; Scorched Earth: 16.58; Unfortified Duchy: 7.11

Formation: Definition: 1.61
Fortresses

Battle Cards and Siege: 13.23;
Besieger Retreat: 13.34; Capture:
13.1, 13.32, 13.34, 13.5; Definition and Strength: 1.21; Effects on
Movement: 13.4; General: 13.1;
Sack and Pillage: 13.52; Siege: 13.2;
Siege End: 13.35; Siege Overrun:
13.42; Siege Resolution: 13.3; Siege
Rounds: 13.22, 13.33

Game End

Other than Sudden Death: 19.4;
Peace Roll: 19.6; Retreat from
Moscow: 19.7; Sudden Death: 19.1,
19.2, 19.3; Sudden Death Conquest
of Russia: 19.2, 19.5; Sudden Death

▪

Imperial Defeat: 19.3, 19.5; Tsarist
Will to Fight: 19.8

Game Turn
Definition: 4.1; First Turn Imperial
Surprise Attack: 18.2; Impulses: 4.2;
Interphase: 4.9, 17; Omissions: 18.1

Home: 1.21, 1.24; see Duchies
and Zones
Impulses
Definition: 4.2; Pass Impulse: 4.23;
Pre-Emptive Impulse: 4.22; Rounds:
4.2, 4.24; Scheduled Impulse: 4.2

Impulse Track
Definition: 1.3; Impulse Track
Order: 1.3

Interception
Army Group: 11.51; Attrition: 11.5;
Definition: 11.1; Evasion and: 11.11;
Multiple: 11.2; Resolving: 11.4;
Restrictions 11.3

Interphase
Card Preparation: 17.4; Deployment: 17.3; General: 4.1, 4.9, 17;
Reinforcements: 17.2; Resources:
17.1

Keys
Control Markers: 1.9; Control Track:
1.9; Definition: 1.21; Scorched Earth
effects: 16.58

Leaders
Battle Rating: 1.6; Commanders:
1.6; Command Rating: 1.6; Definition: 1.6; Losses of: 12.51; Staff
Officers: 1.6, 10.54, 10.63, 12.2;
Theatre of War Strategic Transfer:
17.36

Lines of March: Definition: 1.22
Marsh: 1.22; see Lines of March
Morale
Affecting Camps: 9; Automatic
Victory: 9.22; Check: 9.2; Hesitancy
– 9.31; Improving: 9.5; Level: 9;
Morale Gain Markers: 9.11, 9.5,
9.51, 14.5, 16.54; Morale Loss
Markers: 9.11, 9.51, 14.5, 16.54;
Morale Step: 4.5; Morale Table: 9.3;
Morale Track: 9.12; Times to Check
Morale: 9.4

Morale—Check
After Battle: 9.42; General: 9, 9.2,
9.4; For 9+ Morale Loss Markers:
9.41; Times For: 9.4

Morale—Improving
Capturing Fortress: 13.51; Flagging
Fortress or Depot or capturing
DMC: 9.53; General: 9.5; Imperial
Change of Attrition Level: 14.48;
Loot: 12.10; Spending CPs: 9.52;
Spending Resources: 16.54, 16.55

P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308

▪

Morale—Level
Disrupts: 12.54; General: 9; Limits:
9; Retreats: 12.61

Movement
Amphibious Assault: 15.3; Army:
10.1; Attrition: 10.4; Austrian, Prussian, Imperial Allied Formations:
10.12; Convoys: 15.2; Convoy &
Deployment: 17.34; Entering Battle:
10.7; Forced March: 10.42; Individual Soldiers: 10.11; Restrictions:
10.5; Sea Movement: 15, 15.1;
Stacking: 10.2; Through Enemy
Formations or Fortresses: 10.5

Powers: Definition: 1.1
Regrouping
Definition: 6, 6.2; Kutuzov: 6.35;
Limit on Deployment: 17.35; Placing: 6.32, 6.33

Reinforcements
Deployment: 17.3; Deployment Attrition: 17.33; Excess Card Discards:
17.43; General: 17.2; Imperial:
17.21; Tsarist: 17.22; Tsarist First
Army Convoy Deployment: 17.34;
Winter Deployment before Turn 4:
17.32

Resources
Balancing: 4.6; Belong to a Power:
2.7; Buying Cards with: 16.3;
Constructing Entrenchments: 16.56;
Creating Scorched Earth: 16.57;
General: 16.1; Improving Imperial
Attrition Level: 16.53; Obtaining
Imperial Attrition Gain Markers:
16.52; Offsetting Attrition with:
16.4; Receiving: 16.2; Removing
Imperial Attrition Loss Markers:
16.51; Removing Morale Loss
Markers: 16.54, 16.55; Victory: 16.6,
20.2, 20.4

River: 1.22; see Lines of March
Rough: 1.22; see Lines of March
Scorched Earth
Creating: 16.57; Effects: 16.58

Shared Duchy: 1.21; see Duchies
Siege: 13.2; see Fortresses
Soldiers
Definition: 1.5; Number is Absolute
Limit: 1.5; Shortages for Builds:
5.11; Shortages for Removals: 5.12

Victory
Basic Victory Points: 20.2; Bonus
Victory Points: 20.3; General: 20.1;
Individual Victory: 20.5; Tie-Breakers: 20.4

Zones
Control: 3.2; Definition: 1.24;
Movement: 10.51

www.GMTGames.com

