Living Rules

August 2016

RULES OF PLAY
TABLE OF CON T EN TS

1.	Introduction................................................2
2.	Sequence of Play.........................................7
3.	Commands..................................................9
4.	Special Activities.........................................17
5.	Events.........................................................19
6.	Winter Quarters Round..............................20

7.	Victory........................................................21
8.	Non-Player Factions....................................23
Key Terms Index.............................................33
Available Forces..............................................35
Set-up.............................................................36
Scenarios.........................................................37

This is the “Living Rules” document for the game. It includes errata and clarifications to the original rules.
To aid readability, errata is indicated in blue text.

GMT Games, LLC • P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308 • www.GMTGames.com

2

1.0 Introduction

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

R U LE S O F P L AY
1.2 Components

Liberty or Death—The American Insurrection is a board game
about the American Rebellion from 1775 to 1783. It adapts
GMT Games’ COIN series game system about modern insurgencies to depict the political, military, and economic affairs of
the conflict for the British Colonies in America.
In Liberty or Death, one to four players take the roles of one or
more Factions in North America: the British attempt to suppress a distant insurrection throughout a massive region and
across the sea; the Patriots try to incite rebellion through the
population while fighting the British on their own terms; their
Indian rivals cooperate with the British to limit the Patriots’
growth in and beyond the Colonies; and the French strive to
confound the British in North America.
By issuing Commands and utilizing a Faction’s Special Activities and various events, players assemble and maneuver forces
to influence or control the population of the Colonies, generate
Resources, and achieve their Faction’s objectives. Cards regulate
turn order, events, and victory checks.
The game’s most important functions are summarized on several aid sheets. This rule book lists key terms in an index near
the end and explains on the final pages how to set up. Players
seeking gradual instruction should start with the tutorial in
the Playbook.

A complete game of Liberty or Death includes:
•	 One 22" x 34" mounted game board (1.3)
•	 A deck of 109 playing cards (5.0)
•	 166 red, green, blue, tan, and white wooden playing pieces,
some embossed (1.4, 1.8, 2.2)
•	 Six black and six gray wooden pawns (3.1.1)
•	 Four 11" x 17" Faction player aid foldouts (3.0, 4.0, 7.0)
•	 Two 11" x 17" Non-Player Faction flowchart foldouts
(8.4-8.7)
•	 Four 8½" x 11" Sequence of Play and Battle Procedure
sheets (2.0, 3.6)
•	 Two 11" x 17" Random Spaces and Non-player Events
foldouts (8.2, 8.3)
•	 Two sheets of markers
•	 This rule book
•	 A background play book
•	 One black 6-sided dice
•	 Three blue 6-sided dice marked 1-3 twice
•	 Three red 6-sided dice marked 1-3 twice
•	 Nine plastic Leader stands

1.1 General Course Of Play

In Liberty or Death, cards are played from the deck one at a
time with the current card in play as well as one card ahead
revealed to all players. Each Event card shows the order in which
the Factions become Eligible to choose either from a menu
of Commands and Special Activities or the card’s particular
Event. Executing an Event or Command renders that Faction
Ineligible to do so on the next card. Winter Quarters cards
mixed in with the Event cards provide periodic opportunities
for instant victory and activities such as collecting Resources.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

3

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

1.3 The Map

The map shows the British Colonies of North America and
neighboring Provinces divided into various types of spaces.

Control marker box

1763 Proclamation Line

Population (2)

French Agent Mobilization
Space

Indian Reserve Space
(black dot)

Province Boundary

Colony Space
(white dot)

City movement direction
Displaced City actual location

Support & Opposition
marker box

Space Name

Shared Colony Boundary

City Space (yellow dot)

1.3.1 Map Spaces. Map spaces include rural Provinces (Colonies and Indian Reserve) and urban Cities. All spaces can hold
forces.
1.3.2 Provinces. Each Province shows a Population value (Pop)
of 0 to 2 (each Population value representing roughly 50,000
Colonists). Population value affects victory by counting toward
a Faction’s Support for or Opposition to the British (1.6).
Population value also affects some Commands (3.0).
1.3.3 Cities. Similarly, each City shows a Population value
of 1 to 2 (each Population value representing roughly 50,000
Colonists with adjustments made for economic value).
Note: The Cities of New York and Philadelphia are displaced
to the east to improve playability on the map. Their actual
location is marked by a smaller circle connected by a white
shaded area.
Naming Convention Note: When referring to Quebec City
and New York City, the word City always designates those
Cities. Otherwise “Quebec” and “New York” always refers to
the Province.
1.3.4 Indian Reserve Provinces. The map includes parts of the
Indian Reserve Provinces of Quebec, Northwest, Southwest
and Florida. These are considered Provinces but not Colonies.
They have 0 population.

1.3.5 Colonies. Colonies are Provinces that represent the thirteen British Colonies. Delaware and Maryland are combined
into one Colony space, as are Connecticut and Rhode Island;
as a result there are only eleven Colony spaces.
1.3.6 Adjacency. Adjacency affects the movement of forces and
implementation of certain Events. Any two spaces that border
on (touch) one another are adjacent.
1.3.7 West Indies. West Indies (WI) is a holding box that is
not in play until after Treaty of Alliance (TOA) is played.
It has 0 population.
Note: The West Indies have a number of characteristics detailed in later sections regarding stacking (1.4.2), Squadron/
Blockade markers (1.9), Winter Quarters (6.2.2, 6.3.1), and
Battle (3.6).

1.3.8 Overflow. Use the two Overflow
boxes for pieces that exceed the room
in a space on the map; place the associated Overflow counter in that space.
1.3.9 Unavailable. Use the Unavailable French Forces box to
hold certain French Regulars and Squadrons/Blockades prior to
the French moving them to the Available French Forces box (or
the West Indies box in the case of the Squadrons/Blockades).
Use the Unavailable British Forces box to hold certain British
Regulars and Tories prior to their Release Date as designated
by the Scenario Set-up (2.1).

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

4

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

1.4 Pieces

The wooden pieces represent the Factions’ various forces: British
Regulars (red cubes) and Tories (green cubes), Patriot Militia
(blue hexagonal cylinders), Patriot Continentals (blue cubes),
French Regulars (white cubes), Indian War Parties (tan hexagonal cylinders), Indian Villages (tan discs), and all British and
Patriot Forts (five-pointed stars). Leaders are represented by
either round markers or stand-up markers (players may choose
to use one type or the other).

Select Components
Cubes:

Leaders:

	
	
	British	

	
Patriots	

	
French	

Indians

French Navy:

	
	
	
	
	British	 British	 Patriot	 French
	 Regulars	
Tories	 Continentals	Regulars
	

	
	

Patriot Militia:	

Indian War Party:

	
	
	
Active	 Underground	 Active	Underground
Forts:

	
	
	British	

Patriot

Indian
Resource & Eligibility markers:

	

	

	

	 Indian	 British	Continentals	 French
Wooden Pawns:

	

	

Squadron side	

	

Blockade side

Design Note

Forts and Villages represent fortifications, headquarters,
training camps, community centers and supply depots as well as
capability to organize and project force
(both politically and militarily).

Villages:

	

	
	

	

1.4.1 Availability and Removal. The Available Forces Table on
page 35 lists the number of pieces in the game and Leaders for
each Faction. Scenario set up (2.1) specifies units as Available
and Unavailable. Keep forces Available for placement in the
Available Forces box. Place Indian Villages, Patriot Forts and
British Forts in the highest-numbered empty spaces on the
Available Indian Villages, Available Patriot Forts or Available
British Forts tracks to show the number of on-map Forts and
Villages. This also helps track victory (7.0) and calculate Resources added (6.3). Some French and British forces may be
Unavailable and will remain in the Unavailable Forces box until
moved to the Available Forces box by Special Activity, Event, or
during the Winter Quarters Redeployment Phase (6.5.3). British and French may have forces in the West Indies box—neither
Available, Unavailable nor on the map—and British, Patriots
and French forces can become Casualties (1.6.4). Otherwise,
forces removed from the map go to Available.
Unless otherwise instructed (by Event, 5.1), forces may only
be placed from or replaced with those in the Available boxes.
A piece to be replaced by a piece that is unavailable is simply
removed.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

5

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

Important: Factions, while executing a Command, Special
Activity, or Event to place their own forces, may take them
from elsewhere on the map into Available if and only if the
desired force type is not Available.
EXAMPLE: Indians without Available War Parties could
remove War Parties during a Gather (3.4.1) in order to place
them Underground.
EXCEPTION: The British and French may not do so with
Regulars but may with Tories and Forts.

1.4.2 Stacking. No more than two Forts/Villages (of any Factions) may occupy a single City, Province or the West Indies.
Placing pieces (such as Forts or Villages via Muster (3.2.1,
3.5.3), Rally (3.3.1), Gather (3.4.1) or Event (5.1)) or moving
pieces may never violate stacking. The only pieces that may occupy the West Indies (1.3.7) are British and French Regulars,
British Forts and French Squadrons. Indian pieces may never
occupy a City space.
1.4.3 Underground/Active. Militia or War Parties are either
Underground-symbol end down-or Active-symbol end up.
Certain actions and Events flip them from one state to the other.
Villages, Forts and Cubes are always Active. Always set up and
place new Militia and War Parties Underground (including if
replacing a piece).
Note: Unless instructions specify “Underground” Militia or
War Parties, it is sufficient to “Activate” already Active Militia
or War Parties (they stay Active). Also, “moving” or “relocating” Militia or War Parties does not affect Underground
status unless specified.

1.5 Players & Factions

The game may have up to four players, each as one or more
Factions: the British (red and green), the Patriots (blue), the
Indians (tan), and the French (white). In a one-player game,
the player may play the British and Indians together, or the
Patriots and French, or any one Faction (8.8). Leftover Factions
are controlled either by rules section 8 as “Non-Players” or, if
preferred with two or three players, as below.
No Non-Player Option. With two or three players, the players (rather than the Non-Player rules, 8.0) may control any
leftover Factions:
•	 With two players, one player controls British and Indians
(Royalists), the other Patriots and French (Rebellion).
• 	With three players, a single player controls British and Indians
(Royalists) or, if preferred, Patriots and French (Rebellion).
1.5.1 Side: The Royalist, the British and Indians, are one side.
The Rebellion, Patriots and French, are the other side.
Note: Although the Factions on the same side share strategic
and tactical affinities, they do not share victory conditions
(7.0). When one Faction wins, the other Faction on the same
side does not win.

1.5.2 Friends and Enemies. Factions on the same side are
Friends with (Friendly to) one another. Factions on opposing
Sides are Enemies to one another. Friendly Factions cannot
Battle, Skirmish, War Path or Partisans one another.
1.5.3 Negotiation. Factions may make any mutual arrangements within the rules. Factions are not permitted to transfer
Resources to another Faction except by Command, Special
Activity or Event (per 2.3). All negotiations are open. The rules
do not bind Factions to agreements.

1.6 Support, Opposition, Casualties And Forts/
Villages

Support and Opposition affect victory and some Commands
and Special Activities.
1.6.1 Cities and Provinces with at least one Population (1.3.2.3) always show 1 of 5 levels of its populace’s Support for or
Opposition to the British government that can shift during play:
• Active Support
• Passive Support
• Neutral
• Passive Opposition
• Active Opposition

Spaces with 0 Population are always Neutral, never at Support
or Opposition.
1.6.2 Active Support/Opposition counts double Population
for Total Support/Opposition (1.6.3) affecting victory (7.2,
7.3). Show Support or Opposition with markers placed in each
City or Province. Show Neutral spaces by the absence of such
markers. The four Indian Reserve spaces and the West Indies
are marked as “Always Neutral” and never contain such markers.
1.6.3 Total Support and Total Opposition. Every Faction’s victory depends on the total value of population
Support or Opposition, respectively.
Adjust “Total Support” or “Total Opposition” on the numbered
edge track per the box below as any change to Support or Opposition occurs.
Neutral
Total Support = (2 x Population in Active Support) +
(1 x Population in Passive Support)
Total Opposition = (2 x Population in Active Opposition) +
(1 x Population in Passive Opposition)
1.6.4 Casualties. British Regulars, Tories, British Forts, French
Regulars, Patriot Continentals, and Patriot Forts removed due
to certain Commands, Special Activities or as designated by
certain Events are placed in the Casualties box. Units in the
Casualties box are not available to be used in any manner until
the Reset Phase of the Winter Quarters Round (6.7). Exception:
Forts are immediately returned to Available and may be built
immediately but are still counted toward Cumulative British
Casualties or Cumulative Rebellion Casualties. During the

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

6

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

Reset Phase of the Winter Quarters Round, all units in the
Casualties box are returned to Available.
Cumulative British Casualties (CBC)
reflects the total British Regular, Tories and Fort Casualties during the
entire game and is tracked by accumulating Casualties as they occur on the numbered edge track.
Cumulative Rebellion Casualties (CRC) reflects the total
French Regular, Continental and Patriot Fort Casualties during
the entire game and is tracked by accumulating Casualties as
they occur on the numbered edge track.
Note: Casualties are not limited to 50. If the CRC or CBC
marker approaches 50, reset both CRC and CBC markers
down 10 (or 20) each. The difference is what matters for
Victory calculations.

1.6.5 Forts and Villages. Patriot Forts and Indian Villages
placed on the map are tracked to determine victory conditions.
British Forts are placed in the Available British Forts track.
Available Patriot Forts and Indian Villages are placed on, and
removed from, the Available Indian Villages/Patriot Forts track
which facilitates calculation of the number placed on the map.
The highest value showing in the empty holding space indicates
the number of Forts/Villages on the map.
Note: The tracks are offset by three so players can look at
the number of Forts/Villages placed and visually determine
which Faction is ahead in its second victory condition (7.2).

1.7 Control

The Rebellion Controls a Province or
City if the pieces of the two Rebellion
Factions (Patriot and French) combined exceed those of the Royalist
Factions (British and Indians) combined. The British Control
a Province or City if Royalist pieces exceed Rebellion pieces
and at least one British piece is present in the space. If Indian
pieces with no British pieces are in a space and they equal or
exceed Rebellion pieces, no Faction Controls the space. Control
affects certain activities. Adjust British Control and Rebellion
Control markers as Control changes due to placement, removal, or movement of pieces. If no Faction Controls a space
then there is no Control marker placed in that space.

1.8 Resources

At any moment, each Faction has between 0 and 50 Resources
that it uses to pay for Commands (3.0). Mark Resources on the
edge track with a cylinder of the Faction’s color (1.5). Factions
are not permitted to transfer Resources to another Faction
except by Command, Special Activity or Event (per 2.3).

of the Naval Pressure Special Activity after the Treaty of
Alliance card is played (2.3.9). The FNI level must remain at
0 before the Treaty of Alliance card is played. Blockades
are placed by the French as the FNI level is raised. For each
level the FNI is lowered the British remove one Blockade to
the West Indies and flip the counter to the Squadron side.

Available Blockade markers
that have not been placed on a
City reside in the West Indies
holding box (or in the Unavailable French Forces box
depending on the Scenario) on
their Squadron side. They increase British Loss Level in the
West Indies by one total (during any Battle Command) (3.6.5,
3.6.6). FNI level may never exceed the number of Blockades
that are Available.

Blockades may not be placed until after the
Treaty of Alliance card is played (2.3.9).
After Treaty of Alliance is played, Available
Squadrons/Blockades remain in the West
Indies on their Squadron side unless placed
through increasing FNI.
Squadrons/Blockades have the following impact on play:
•	No British Muster of Regulars in that City,
nor in an adjacent Colony unless that Colony is also adjacent
to another City that is not Blockaded,
•	 No British Garrison to or from that City,
•	 No British March to that City or Provinces adjacent to that
City (unless destination space is adjacent to starting space),
•	 The population of that City is considered 0 for purposes of
calculating Support and during the Resource Phase of the
Winter Quarters Round, and
•	 More than one Blockade may be placed on a City but the
additional Blockade has no additional impact.
•	 British Garrison not available if FNI at Level 3.

Note: FNI-related events may come up before the Treaty
of Alliance card has been played. Factions should ignore
all impacts on FNI and may not place Blockades until the
Treaty of Alliance card is played and Blockades are available in the West Indies (as Squadrons.)

1.10 Leaders

1.9 French Naval Intervention

French Naval Intervention (FNI) represents the
commitment of French naval strength to North
America. At each level, the French will have that
number of Blockades placed on Cities. Both the
French and British may adjust the level of FNI through the use
© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Leader markers represent political
and military figures who may have
an impact on Events, Commands
and Special Activities. Each Faction
receives one Leader in the Scenario
Set-Up. Only one Leader per Faction is in play
at any time. A Leader can follow any unit of its
Faction anywhere it goes on the map during any

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

Command or Event. A Leader in the Available Forces box may
be placed on the map or West Indies along with any piece from
the Available Forces box. A Leader has the following impact
on play:
•	 Leader units cannot be eliminated. If at any time the current
Leader is in a space with no pieces of its Faction, the owning
Faction moves that Leader to any space with the same
Faction’s pieces or to its Available Forces box.
•	 During the Redeploy Phase of the Winter Quarters Round,
one Faction’s Leader may change (6.5.1). Each Faction may
move its current Leader to any space with that Faction’s
pieces in the following order: Indians, French, British, Patriots
(6.5.2).
•	 If a Faction plays a Brilliant Stroke card (5.1.4), the
Leader must be in a space involved in at least one of the
Limited Commands (including an origination space for
a March, Scout, Raid or Garrison Limited Command). If
not, the Brilliant Stroke cannot be played. A Brilliant
Stroke card may only be played once (unless Trumped by
another Faction in which case it is returned for future use).
•	 Each Leader has a Capability listed in the table below:

Leader
Washington

Leader Capabilities

No further changes

Rochambeau
No changes
until TOA

Lauzun

French
French

No further changes

Gage

British

Howe

British

Clinton

British

Brant

Indians

Cornplanter

Indians

No further changes

Dragging Canoe Indians

No further changes

110

Faction
Capability
Patriots Double Rebellion Win the
Day shift in the space. –1 to
Defender Loss Level when
Rebellion Defending in the
space

French March and Battle with
Patriot Command at no cost.
Additional +1 to Defender
Loss Level when French
Attacking in the space.

1st shift: Reward Loyalty is
free in the space.
Before executing a British
SA first lower FNI 1 level.

Skirmish removes 1 additional
Militia in the space.

War Path removes 1
additional Militia in the space.
Gather builds Villages for 1
War Party in the space.

Raid may move 1 extra space
if originated in the space.

“In the space” means the Leader must be in the space benefiting
from the Capability.

7

2.0 SEQUENCE OF PLAY
2.1 Set-Up

Follow the instructions on last four pages of this rule book to
choose a Scenario and various play options, assign Factions to
players, prepare the draw deck, and set up markers and forces.

2.2 Start

Begin play by revealing the top card of the draw deck and
placing it onto a played cards pile. Then reveal the next card
and place it on top of the draw deck. The card on the played
card stack is played first; the card on top of the draw deck will
be played next.
Note: Players will see one card ahead into the deck (2.3.7).

All played cards and the number of cards in the draw deck are
open to inspection.
When a Winter Quarters card is turned up, stop play and
swap it with the played card. Conduct a Winter Quarters Round
immediately (6.0).
Record Steps: As the steps of each Event card play are completed, place a cylinder of the Faction’s color (1.5) into the
appropriate box on the Sequence of Play track (or, for Winter
Quarters Rounds 6.0, advance the Winter Quarters marker).

2.3 Event Cards

When playing an Event card, up to two Factions will execute
Commands or the Event.
•	 Factions whose cylinder is in the “Eligible” box receive these
options in the left-to-right order of the Faction symbols
shown at the top of the card.
•	 Factions with cylinders in the “Ineligible” box do nothing.

2.3.1 Eligibility. Factions that did not execute a Command or
Event on the previous card are Eligible (their cylinders will
start the card in the “Eligible” box per 2.3.6). Factions that did
are Ineligible. (All Factions start the game Eligible.) See also
Free Commands (3.1.2).
2.3.2 Faction Order. The Eligible Faction with the leftmost
symbol (skipping any Ineligible Factions) is the 1st Eligible to
execute a Command or Event or to Pass. The next leftmost is
the 2nd Eligible.
2.3.3 Passing. If a 1st or 2nd Eligible Faction opts to Pass, it
receives +1 Resource if Patriots or Indians, or +2 Resources if
British or French, and remains Eligible for the next card. The
next leftmost Eligible Faction then replaces the Passing Faction as the new 1st or 2nd Eligible Faction and receives the
same options to execute or Pass. If the last (rightmost) Eligible
Faction Passes, adjust cylinders (2.3.6) and play the next card.

2.3.4 Options for Eligible Factions.
1ST ELIGIBLE: If the 1st Eligible Faction does not Pass (2.3.3),
it may execute either:

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

8

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

•	 a Command (Com) (3.0)—with or without a Special Activity
(4.0); or
•	 the Event shown on the card.

OPTIONS FOR 2ND ELIGIBLE: If the 2nd Eligible Faction
does not Pass (2.3.3), it also may execute a Command and possibly the Event, but its options depend on what the 1st Eligible
Faction executed:
•	 Command Only: If the 1st Eligible Faction executed a
Command only, the 2nd Eligible Faction may execute a
Limited Command (2.3.5).
•	 Command and Special Activity: If the 1st Eligible Faction
executed a Command with a Special Activity, the 2nd Eligible
Faction may execute a Limited Command or instead execute
the Event.
•	Event: If the 1st Eligible Faction executed the Event, the
2nd Eligible Faction may execute a Command, with a Special
Activity if desired.
For a Command to qualify as executed it must occur within
(select) at least one space, with or without effect.
EXCEPTION: The French Command Roderigue Hortalez et Cie
(3.5.2) never selects any space, but counts as executed if at least one
French Resource is paid.
Note: For ease of reference, these options are illustrated on
the Sequence of Play aid sheet and on the game board.
2.3.5 Limited Command. A Limited Command is a Command in just one space with no Special Activity. If the Limited
Command involves pieces from multiple spaces, it can only
include one destination space. A Limited Command counts as
a Command. See also Non-player Commands (8.1).
2.3.6 Adjust Eligibility. After the 1st and 2nd Eligible Factions
complete all execution of Commands, Special Activities, and
Events (or after Eligible Factions instead have Passed), adjust
cylinders on the Sequence of Play track as follows:
•	 Any Faction that did not execute a Command or Event (and
was not rendered Ineligible by an Event) to the “Eligible” box.
•	 Any Faction that executed a Command (including a Limited
Command) or Event to the “Ineligible” box (unless otherwise
specified by the Event; see also Free Commands, 3.1.2).
•	 If a Faction played a Brilliant Stroke card (2.3.8), all
Factions to “Eligible”.
Play Note: Some Events (5.0) will enable the executing Faction to remain Eligible or render other Factions Ineligible
through the next card. As a reminder, mark a Faction thus
remaining Eligible by placing its cylinder at the left edge of
its Sequence of Play “Event” box. Mark a Faction thus rendered Ineligible by placing its cylinder under the executing
Faction’s, to show that it will be Ineligible for the next card.
2.3.7 Next Card. After adjusting Eligibility, move the draw
deck’s top card onto the played card pile face-up and reveal
the draw deck’s next card. If the just revealed card is a Winter
Quarters card, switch it with the played Event card, so that
the Winter Quarters card becomes the current played card

(2.2, 2.4). Play the played card, proceeding with the appropriate
sequence (2.3 or 6.0).

Winter is Coming Option

For more foreknowledge, if all players agree at SetUp. (2.1) when the Winter Quarters card is exposed,
instead of switching the places of the two exposed cards,
play the played event and wait until the Winter Quarters card becomes the played card to conduct the Winter
Quarters Round. (6.0) This would create an option to play
in the manner of prior games in the COIN series.
2.3.8 Brilliant Stroke. Each
Faction begins the Scenarios with
one Brilliant Stroke card
(5.1.4) except for the French, who
begin with two including the
Treaty of Alliance, but the
Treaty of Alliance must be
played first. Brilliant Stroke
cards are a type of Event (5.0). A
Faction may play its Brilliant
Stroke card to cancel and discard
a currently played Event card if:
•	 the Faction playing the Brilliant Stroke card is Eligible,
•	 the 1st Eligible Faction has not yet taken an action, and
•	no Winter Quarters card is showing.
PROCEDURE: The Faction with the Brilliant Stroke
card interrupts the usual Sequence of Play by placing the
Brilliant Stroke card over the played Event card and
executing the instructions on the Brilliant Stroke card.
The Brilliant Stroke card stays in the played card pile, as
normal. The played Event card under the Brilliant Stroke
card remains there and is never played.
BRILLIANT STROKE CARD EVENTS: The Faction playing a Brilliant Stroke card may execute the instructions with
no Resource cost. (EXCEPTION: British must pay for Reward
Loyalty). Each Command and Special Activity is independent
(but still allows a Common Cause Special Activity to affect a
March or Battle Command on the same Brilliant Stroke card)
and not limited by other actions on this card. All Factions are
moved to Eligible after the play of a Brilliant Stroke card
including the Faction that played it.
TRUMPING BRILLIANT STROKE CARDS: Trumping is
the act of playing a Faction’s Brilliant Stroke card to cancel
a just-played Brilliant Stroke card. (The Trump card takes
the place of the Trumped card and is executed as if it had been
played first.) A Trumped Brilliant Stroke card is returned
to its owner for possible use later. The Treaty of Alliance
Brilliant Stroke card may Trump another Faction’s Brilliant Stroke card. The Indian Faction may Trump another
Faction’s Brilliant Stroke card (excluding the Treaty of
Alliance Brilliant Stroke card); The French Faction may

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

9

Trump the Patriots or British; British may Trump the Patriots;
Patriots may not Trump.
Play Note: The 1st Eligible Faction need not declare what it
would execute before a Faction must decide whether to play
its Brilliant Stroke card.

2.4 Winter Quarters Card

2.3.9 Brilliant Stroke - Treaty of Alliance. The French
Faction chooses when to play the Treaty of Alliance card
subject to the following conditions.
•	
The French have accumulated more than 15
Available French Regulars and Squadrons/
Blockades plus Cumulative British Casualties
(CBC) (1.6.4, 7.2). This total is also referred to
as French Preparations and is tracked on the edge track;
•	 the French Faction is Eligible;
•	 the 1st Eligible Faction has not yet taken an action; and
•	no Winter Quarters card is showing.

Treaty of Alliance replaces and cancels the played Event
card as long as no one has acted on that Event card. It can also
Trump (2.3.8) any other Brilliant Stroke card from another
Faction and it cannot be Trumped by another Faction. This still
allows the French Faction to play one Brilliant Stroke later.
All Factions are Eligible after this card is played. The French
Faction must execute the event and nothing else.
After the French play Treaty of Alliance:
•	 They have a second Brilliant Stroke card available to use
from that point forward.
•	 They may execute any Commands and Special Activities
except those that are limited to before Treaty of Alliance.
Before the Treaty of Alliance, the French may execute
only Roderigue Hortalez et Cie (3.5.2) and French Agent
Mobilization (3.5.1) and the Préparer la Guerre (4.5.1) plus
Events from Event cards (5.3).
•	 French pieces may now be deployed on the map and West
Indies (and conversely may not before the Treaty of
Alliance).
•	 They qualify for Victory (7.2).

If playing a Winter Quarters card, conduct a Winter Quarters Round (6.0).
2.4.1 Final Winter Quarters. If the Final Winter Quarters
card’s Support Phase is completed without a victory (6.1), the
game ends: determine victory under 7.3.
Play Note: Each series of Event cards up to a Winter
Quarters card is a “Campaign,” representing one year of war.

3.0 Commands
3.1 Commands In General

The Faction executing a Command chooses one of the Commands listed on its Faction player aid sheet and, if applicable,
selects the map spaces (typically several) to be involved. Select
a given space only once for a given Command.
Commands usually cost Resources, often per space selected;
the paying Faction must have enough Resources to pay for the
Command, including in each selected space.
The executing Faction chooses the order of the spaces in which
the Command is resolved, the Enemy Factions (1.5) or pieces
to be affected (targeted), and the friendly pieces to be placed,
replaced, removed, or moved. Actions affecting another Faction’s pieces, Friendly or Enemy, do not require that Faction’s
permission.
3.1.1 Pawns. If desired, mark spaces selected for Commands
(3.0), Special Activities (4.0), or other actions with gray and
black pawns. The pawns are for convenience, not a limit on play.
3.1.2 Free Commands. Certain Events (5.0) or phases (6.2.2),
grant free Commands or Special Activities: they cost no Resources to any Faction involved and, if executed by a Faction
other than the one playing an Event, could leave it Eligible
(2.3.6). Other requirements and procedures still apply unless
modified by Event text (5.1).

3.2 British Commands

The British chooses from Muster, Garrison, March, and Battle
Commands.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

10

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

3.2.1 Muster. Muster Commands add British forces and can
build Support (1.6). Select any qualifying space and pay one
Resource per selected space.
•	 To place British Regulars, the British Faction may select any
one City that is not Blockaded or an adjacent Colony, or the
West Indies.
•	 To place Tories, the British Faction may select any Cities
or Colonies (not the West Indies) containing or adjacent to
British Regulars or British Forts, not at Active Opposition.

Garrison Example

PROCEDURE: First, in one selected City (except a Blockaded City), adjacent Colony or the West Indies, place up to
six Regulars.
Next, in any selected Cities or Colonies (not at Active Opposition) containing or adjacent to British Regulars or Forts,
place up to two Tories or one if at Passive Opposition.
Then, in up to one selected Muster space (including West
Indies if selected):
•	 Replace any three British cubes (Regulars or Tories) with
one Fort, or
•	 Reward Loyalty (6.4.1) to build Support. The British must
have one or more British Regulars, one or more Tories, and
Control (1.7) in the space and must pay one added Resource
per level of Opposition and Support (and Propaganda and
Raid marker) (even if Muster was free (3.1.2)). There is
no limit to the number of levels shifted when Rewarding
Loyalty during Muster.
3.2.2 Garrison. Garrison Commands protect Cities by moving
in Regulars and locating and displacing Enemy units there. Pay
two Resources total (not per space). If a Limited Command
(2.3.5), all moving British Regulars must end in a single destination City. A Blockaded City or units starting there may not
be included in any part of a Garrison Command.
PROCEDURE: Move any number of British Regulars from
any spaces (not Blockaded Cities) to Cities that are not Blockaded. Then, in each City that is not Blockaded (whether or not
a British Regular just moved there), Activate one Militia for
every three British cubes there. Then, if desired, in one City
(under British Control, no Patriot Fort and not Blockaded)
displace all Rebellion units to an adjacent space at no added
cost. If executing a Limited Command (2.3.5), the units
Activated and/or displaced must be in/from the destination
City. Garrison not available if FNI at level 3.

The Situation before Garrison

British choose to execute a Command and Special Activity. They
choose to execute a Garrison Command and pay two Resources total.

The British can “Move any British Regulars from any spaces (not
Blockaded Cities) to Cities.” Their intention is to use the Command
to Control every City on the map in preparation for the upcoming
Winter Quarters Round. A Winter Quarters card will turn up
any time now. During the Resource Phase of the Winter Quarters
Round the British get Resources based on the population of Cities
under British Control. Conversely, the French get Resources for
Cities that are not under British Control.

Only British Regulars may be moved and the only place they may
end is a City. That City may be controlled by either Side or may
be at any alignment (but not Blockaded). This gives the British
great flexibility. Additionally the British will be able to activate
one Militia in each space for every three cubes there (British Regulars or Tories). And lastly, “in 1 City (under British Control, no
Patriot Fort and not Blockaded) displace all Rebellion units to an
adjacent space.”
New York City is Blockaded so British Regulars can neither move
from or to there. British Regulars will move as follows:

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

11

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

1 from Quebec Province to Boston
1 from New York Colony to Quebec City
2 from New York Colony to Philadelphia
2 from Norfolk to Charles Town
4 from Norfolk to Philadelphia
1 from South Carolina to Charles Town
1 from South Carolina to Savannah

The British now take Control of every City and mark each City as
under British Control. With six cubes in Philadelphia, two Militia are Activated. With three cubes in Charles Town, one Militia is
Activated. Now the British can displace all Rebellion units in one
City. Even though the British Control Charles Town, a Patriot
Fort is in the City so the Rebellion units may not be displaced.
That leaves Philadelphia with British Control, no Blockade and no
Patriot Fort and the British can choose where to displace the two
Active Militia. The Militia can be displaced to any adjacent space.
The British choose to displace them to Maryland-Delaware where
they can do no further harm.

PROCEDURE: Move any British Regulars onto an adjacent space (1.3.6) or, if moving units are in or adjacent to a
City (not Blockaded), to another City (not Blockaded) or a
Province adjacent to it. Tories may only accompany (through
the entire process) British Regulars 1 for 1 (Any cubes that
move must reach destination spaces paid for).
Then, in selected destination spaces, Activate one Militia
(1.4.3) for every three British cubes there (whether they just
moved or were already there). No unit moves more than once.
British March Example

The Situation Before the March

British execute a March Command in three spaces and pay three
Resources. The destination spaces will be Boston, Philadelphia and
Pennsylvania. The British player places a gray pawn in each to
mark the location and number of March Commands. The following
pieces move through these paths:
	
Origination	Destination	
Pieces	Space	 Space	 Path

4 British 	
Maryland-	
Pennsylvania	 Adjacent Spaces
Regulars	
Delaware	
	
& 2 Tories			

2 British	
New York City	 Pennsylvania	 New York City
Regulars, 			
to Philadelphia
1 Tory, &			
to Pennsylvania
Clinton
The Situation after Garrison

3.2.3 March. March Commands may move cubes and locate
Militia. Select any spaces as destinations. Pay one Resource per
destination space selected. If executing a Limited Command
(2.3.5), all moving pieces must end in a single destination space.

1 British	
Quebec	
Pennsylvania	 Quebec to Quebec
City to Philadelphia
Regular			
			
to Pennsylvania
2 British	
New York City	 Philadelphia	
Regulars			
2 British	
Regulars	
& 2 Tories	

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Connecticut-	
Rhode Island	

Boston	

New York City to
Philadelphia
Adjacent Spaces

12

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

In Boston, the one Militia is Activated because there are 3+ British
cubes in the space. In Pennsylvania, the one Militia is Activated
because there are 3+ British cubes in the space. Note that one Militia is Activated per three British cubes in the space. Given that
there are 10 British cubes in Pennsylvania, theoretically that could
Activate three Militia if they were in the space.
Change the Control marker in Boston from Rebellion to British
Control.

PROCEDURE: In each selected space, place one Available
Militia or replace two units with one Fort. If the space already
has at least one Patriot Fort, may instead either:
•	 Place a number of Militia up to the number of Patriot Forts
there plus the space’s Population value (1.3.2-.3), or
•	 Move any Militia from any adjacent spaces to there and
flip all Militia there Underground (whether they moved
or not) (1.4.3).
The Patriots may select any one Rally space with a Patriot
Fort and replace any Militia with Continentals.
No Militia may be placed in Indian Reserve spaces.
No unit moves more than once.

3.3.2 March. March Commands may move Militia, Continentals and French Regulars and locate War Parties. Select
any spaces as the destinations of the moving units. Pay one
Resource per destination selected. For each destination space
French enter (Patriot’s choice), the French must also pay one
Resource. If a Limited Command (2.3.5), all moving units must
end in a single destination space.
PROCEDURE: The Patriot moves any of its units desired
into adjacent spaces (1.3.6). No unit moves more than once.
French Regulars may accompany Continentals 1 for 1 at the
Patriot’s option. Units moving from one space to another
move as a single group. Activate one War Party for every
two Continentals in the destination space. Set Militia of a
moving group to Active (1.4.3) if:
• The destination is a British Controlled City before the
move, and
• The moving group’s number of units plus the number of
British cubes in the destination space exceeds 3.

The Situation after the March

3.2.4 Battle. Battle Commands allow the British to fight Rebellion Factions with the possible help of Indians. Select any
spaces and/or West Indies with British and Rebellion pieces.
Pay one Resource per space selected.
PROCEDURE: In one space or West Indies at a time, execute Battle according to the Battle Procedure Table (3.6).

3.3 Patriot Commands

Patriots choose from Rally, March, Battle and Rabble-Rousing.
3.3.1 Rally. Rally Commands add or recover Patriot forces.
Select any spaces without Active Support (1.6) and pay one
Resource per space selected. Militia may not be placed in an
Indian Reserve space or the West Indies.

EXAMPLE: A group of two Underground Militia March from
Virginia to Norfolk, which is British Controlled and where there
are two Tories. Because the destination is a City with British Control and the total of two Tories and moving Militia involved exceeds 3, the two moving Militia flip to Active.
Note: March often Activates Militia, but moves by Event
(5.0) do so only if specified.
3.3.3 Battle. Battle Commands allow the Patriots to fight
Royalist Factions with the possible help of the French. Select
any spaces with Patriot and Royalist pieces. Pay one Resource
per space. For each space French pieces are involved, French
must also pay 1 Resource.
PROCEDURE: In one space at a time, execute according
to the Battles Procedure Table (3.6). For each space French
Regulars are involved in the Battle (at the Patriot’s option
if the French have one or more Resources), the French must
also pay one Resource.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

3.3.4 Rabble-Rousing. Rabble-Rousing Commands in Provinces or Cities
build Opposition (1.6) and place
Propaganda markers that hinder future
Royalist efforts to influence it. Select any spaces with Rebellion
Control and Patriot pieces or at least one Underground Militia.
Pay one Resource per space selected.
PROCEDURE: Place a Propaganda marker and shift one
level toward Active Opposition. Unless Rebellion Control
with a Patriot piece, activate one Underground Militia in
each selected space.
NOTE: Do not place a Propaganda marker if all are already
on the map (there are 12). Adjust Total Support or Opposition (1.6).
Note: The 12 Propaganda markers have a different historical
character on each. This is provided as historical color only. The
Patriots select which Propaganda marker to use.

3.4 Indian Commands

Indians choose from Gather, March, Scout and Raid.
3.4.1 Gather. Gather Commands add or recover Indian forces.
Select any Provinces at Neutral, Passive Opposition or Passive Support (not Active Opposition or Active Support.) Pay
one Resource per Province selected. Pay 0 for the first Indian
Reserve Province.
PROCEDURE: In each selected Province, place one Available War Party or replace two War Parties with one Village.
If the Province already has at least one Village, may instead
either:
•	 Place a number of Available War Parties up to the number
of Villages there plus one or
•	 Move any War Parties from any adjacent spaces to there
and flip all War Parties there Underground (whether they
moved or not) (1.4.3).
No unit moves more than once.

3.4.2 March. March Commands move War Parties. Select any
Provinces (not Cities) as destinations of the moving pieces.
Pay one Resource per destination Province. Pay 0 for the first
destination where all War Parties are originating from Indian
Reserve Provinces. If a Limited Command (2.3.5), all moving
War Parties must end in a single destination Province.
PROCEDURE: Move any War Parties into adjacent Provinces (1.3.6). No War Parties move more than once. War
Parties moving from one Province to another move as a
single group. Set Underground War Parties moving to Active (1.4.3) if:
• The destination space is a Colony Controlled by the
Rebellion before the move, and
• The moving group’s number of pieces plus the number of
Militia in the destination Province exceed 3.

13

EXAMPLE: A group of two Underground Indian War Parties
March from Northwest to New York Colony, which is Rebellion
Controlled and where there are two Militia. Because the destination is a Province with Rebellion Control and the total of two
units and moving War Parties involved exceeds three, the two
moving War Parties flip to Active.
Note: March often Activates War Parties but moves by Event
(5.0) do so only if specified.
3.4.3 Scout. Scout Commands allow War Parties to move
British cubes into an adjacent Province and Skirmish. Pay one
Resource. British also pay one Resource.
PROCEDURE: From one selected Province, the Indians
move at least one War Party into an adjacent Province (not
City) (1.3.6). Activate all moving War Parties. At least one
British Regular must (and Tories up to the number of Regulars may) move with the War Parties. All choices as to who
to move is made at the Indians’ option. All pieces move from
one Province to another as a single group. Activate all Militia
in the destination space. Then the Indians may use British
Regulars to Skirmish (4.2.2) in the destination Province.

3.4.4 Raid. Raid Commands shift
Opposition in up to three Provinces
one level toward Neutral (1.6) and
place Raid markers that hinder future
efforts to influence it. Select up to three Provinces with (or
adjacent to Provinces with) at least one Underground War
Party and at Opposition; pay one Resource per Province.
PROCEDURE: In up to three Provinces, move in up to one
adjacent War Party. Then in each selected Province, Activate
one Underground War Party to place a Raid marker and
shift Opposition one level toward Neutral. Each affected
Province must have a newly-Activated War Party that either just moved in or was already there. Do not place a Raid
marker if all are already on the map (there are 12). Adjust
Total Opposition (1.6).
Note: The 12 Raid markers have a different Indian tribe on
the back of each. This is provided as historical color only. The
Indian player selects which Raid marker to use.

3.5 French Commands

French choose from French Agent Mobilization and Roderigue
Hortalez et Cie before the Treaty of Alliance. After the
Treaty of Alliance, the French may choose Roderigue
Hortalez et Cie, Muster, March and Battle.
3.5.1 French Agent Mobilization. French Agent Mobilization
Commands allows the French to utilize its agents in North
America to place Patriot units before the Treaty of Alliance
card has been played. Select one of the following: Quebec, New
York, New Hampshire, or Massachusetts. The space may not be
at Active Support. Pay one Resource.
PROCEDURE: In the selected Province, place two Available
Militia or one Continental.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

14

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

3.5.2 Roderigue Hortalez et Cie. Roderigue Hortalez et Cie
was a Spanish trading company used as a front for funneling
gunpowder, equipment and currency to the Patriots. The French
may use this Command to increase Patriot Resources before and
after the Treaty of Alliance card has been played.
PROCEDURE: The French pays one or more Resources as
they choose. Patriot Resources are increased by that amount
plus 1.

3.5.3 Muster. Muster Commands augment French forces after
the Treaty of Alliance card has been played. Select any one
Colony or City with Rebellion Control or the West Indies.
Pay two Resources.
PROCEDURE: In the selected Colony, City or West Indies,
the French may place up to four Regulars. Then, if desired in
the selected Colony or City and if Patriots have one or more
Resources, replace two French Regulars with one Patriot Fort
and Patriots pay one Resource.

3.5.4 March. March Commands move French Regulars and
potentially Continentals after the Treaty of Alliance card
has been played. Select any spaces as the destination that already
have Patriot pieces or any space if bringing along one or more
Continentals. Pay one Resource per destination space selected.
For each destination space Continentals enter (French choice),
the Patriots must also pay one Resource. If a Limited Command
(2.3.5), all moving pieces must end in a single destination space.
PROCEDURE: Move any French Regulars into an adjacent
(1.3.6) space containing a Patriot piece or, if moving units
are in or adjacent to a Rebellion Controlled City, to another
Rebellion Controlled City or a Province adjacent to it (similar
to British March (3.2.3) except that Cities must be Rebellion
Controlled). Continentals may only accompany (through
the entire process) French Regulars 1 for 1 (any cubes that
move must reach destination spaces paid for). Continentals
accompany French Regulars at the French’s option. No unit
moves more than once.

3.6 Battle Procedure

Whenever a Faction initiates Battle, whether proceeding from
a Battle Command (3.2.4, 3.3.3, 3.5.5), by Event (2.3.4), or
Winter Quarters Round (6.2.2), this Battle procedure is used
(also following the common Battle Procedure Table in the
player aids).
3.6.1 Factional Cooperation. Decisions in the Battle Procedure
are always made by the executing Faction unless otherwise
specified. See Definitions in 3.6.2 below for additional detail.
When Attacking: The Faction executing the Battle Command
makes all choices in the Battle for that side. French may only
use Patriot pieces and Leader if Patriots pay. Patriots may
only use French pieces and Leader if French pay. British may
always use Indian pieces and Leader if a War Party is in the
space during the Battle. Indians are not capable of executing
a Battle Command.
When Defending: British or Patriots make all choices for
combined Defending Royalist or Rebellion side respectively. If
solely French or Indian pieces are Defending, then that Faction
makes all choices. All Leaders are applicable when Defending.
3.6.2 Definitions. Attacker is the Faction and side executing
the Battle Command. Defender is the enemy of the Attacker.
Force Level refers to the total of each side’s cubes that can
participate, half Active Militia or War Parties if they can participate (rounding down), and Forts if Defending. Loss Level
refers to the result of the enemy side’s dice roll plus modifiers
for the side taking the losses.
Battle Example

3.5.5 Battle. Battle Commands allow the French to fight Royalist Factions with the possible help of the Patriots after the
Treaty of Alliance card has been played. Select any spaces
and/or West Indies with French and Royalist pieces. Pay one
Resource per space or West Indies. For each space Patriot pieces
are involved, Patriot must also pay 1 Resource.
PROCEDURE: In one space or West Indies at a time,
execute according to the Battle Procedure Table (3.6). For
each space Patriot pieces are involved in the Battle (at the
French’s option if the Patriots have one or more Resources),
the Patriots must also pay one Resource.

British Attacking in Pennsylvania

The British execute a Battle Command in Pennsylvania and pay
one Resource.
The British / Royalists are the Attacker and the British make the
Activation decisions.

The Patriots / Rebellion are the Defender and the Patriots make
the Activation decisions.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

3.6.3 Force Levels. Attacker then Defender calculates their
own Force Level.
•	 Choose whether or not to Activate any of its own side’s
Underground units, War Parties (if British Attacking or either
British or Indians Defending) or Militia (if Patriots paid or
either Patriots or French Defending).
•	 Add half (rounding down) Active War Parties (if British
Attacking or Royalist Defending) or Militia (if Patriots paid
or either Patriots or French Defending) to own cubes.
o	 If British Attack, include Tories only up to the number of
British Regulars.
o	If Rebellion Attack, if that Faction paid, add French
Regulars or Continentals up to the number of own Faction’s
cubes.
o	 If Defending, include all that Side’s cubes, Forts and half
of Active Militia or War Parties.
Calculate Royalist Force Level:
•	 British player chooses to Activate two Indian War Parties. (Need
one Underground to get Underground modifier. Activating three
gets no benefit over 2.)
•	 Five British Regulars (+5)
•	 Two British Tories (+2) (up to the number of British Regulars
since British Attacking)
•	 Two Active War Parties (+1)
•	 Force Level 8 (8 divided by 3 rounding down is 2) to roll 2D3

Calculate Rebellion Force Level:
•	 Patriot player chooses to Activate one Militia. (Need one
Underground to get Underground modifier. Already have one
Active and this makes 2.)
•	 Three Continentals (+3) (do not have to pay since Defending)
•	 Two French Regulars (+2) (do not have to pay since Defending)
•	 Two Active Militia (+1) (do not have to pay since Defending)
•	 One Fort (+1) (Fort is added on Defense)
•	 Force Level 7 (7 divided by 3 rounding down is 2) to roll 2D3
Continued below.
3.6.4 Enemy Loss Level. Attacker rolls and adds modifiers to
the roll to determine their Enemy’s (Defender) Loss Level.
Then, Defender rolls and adds modifiers to the roll to determine
their Enemy’s (Attacker) Loss Level.
•	 Divide the Force Level by 3, rounding down, to determine
how many D3s to roll (not more than 3). If Force Level is
two or less, then roll no dice and consider the die roll 0.
•	 Roll the dice.
•	 Adjust the dice roll per the modifiers below in 3.6.5 and 3.6.6.
The modified total is the Enemy Loss Level.

15

3.6.5 Defender Loss Level modifiers (cumulative)
At least half Attacking Cubes are Regulars (if any)..... +1
At least one Attacking side piece Underground .......... +1
At least one Attacking Leader..................................... +1
Attacking including French with Lauzun.................... +1
British Attacking in Blockaded City............................ –1
British Attacking in West Indies and at least one
Squadron is present.................................................. –1
Per Defending Fort ..................................................... –1
Indians Defending in Indian Reserve.......................... –1
Patriots/French Defending with Washington.............. –1
3.6.6 Attacker Loss Level modifiers (cumulative)
At least half Defending Cubes are Regulars (if any).... +1
At least one Defending side piece Underground ......... +1
At least one Defending Leader.................................... +1
British Defending in Blockaded City.......................... –1
British Defending in West Indies and at least one
Squadron is present.................................................. –1
Per Defending Fort...................................................... +1
Calculate Defender (Rebellion) Loss Level
•	 British roll 2D3
o	 Result is 2, 3 = 5
o	 Add modifiers

•	 Defender Loss Level modifiers (+1 net)
o	 Half Attacking Cubes Regulars (+1)
o	 At least one Attacking side Underground (+1)
o	 At least one Attacking Leader (+1)
o	 Per Defending Fort (–1)
o	 Defending with Washington (–1)

•	 The Defender’s modified Loss Level is 6 (Roll (5) +modifiers (+1))
Calculate Attacker (Royalist) Loss Level
•	 Patriots roll 2D3
o	 Result is 1, 2 = 3
o	 Add modifiers

•	 Rebellion modifiers (+3 net)
o	 At least one Defending side Underground (+1)
o	 At least one Defending Leader (+1)
o	 Per Defending Fort (+1)

•	The Attacker’s modified Loss Level is 6 (Roll (3) + modifiers(+3))

3.6.7 Removal. Attacker then Defender must remove own
pieces with values totaling their modified Loss Level or more
(none if negative). For purposes of determining the number of
pieces to be removed, Regulars, Continentals and Forts each
count as two losses and all other pieces count as one loss each.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

16

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

Loss Value Table
Counts as two losses	 British Regulars, French Regulars,
Continentals and Forts
Counts as one loss	
Tories, Militia, War Parties and
Villages

•	 2 British Regulars and two Tories Removed to Casualties. CBC
increased by 4.
Battle Example

Pieces are removed subject to the priorities below.
•	 Royalists alternate removing one each British Regulars then
Tories. Once exhausted, remove Active War Parties. Once
exhausted, if and only if Royalists Defending, Villages then
Forts.
•	 Rebellion alternate removing one each French Regulars then
Continentals then Active Militia. Once exhausted, if and only
if Rebellion Defending, Forts.
•	 Ignore Underground War Parties and Underground Militia.
•	 Place all removed British Regulars, Tories, French Regulars,
and Continentals into the Casualties box. Forts also count
as Casualties but return to Available immediately. Adjust the
CBC and CRC markers accordingly. Other removed pieces
to Available.
Rebellion removal:
•	 Remove six loss points since Defender Loss Level is 6.
•	 Remember that a French Regular, Continental, then Active
Militia, continuing to alternate, are removed one at a time until
the required number of loss points. Once no more, remove Forts
(since Defender).
•	 Remove four pieces:
o	 Remove one French Regular (counts as 2).
o	 Remove one Continental (counts as 2).
o	 Remove one Active Militia (counts as 1). Underground Militia
are not removed.
o	 Remove one French Regular (counts as 2).
•	 Note that this adds up to 7 losses even though the Defender Loss
Level is 6 but the last French Regular is necessary in that “pieces
equal to their modified Loss Level or more must be removed.”
•	 2 French Regulars and one Continental removed to Casualties and
one Active Militia removed to Available. CRC increased by 3.

Royalist removal:
•	 Remove 6 loss points since Attacker Loss Level is 6.
•	 Remember that a British Regular then a Tory, continuing to
alternate, are removed one at a time until the required number
of loss points or more. Once no more, remove Active War Parties.
Note Attacker does not remove Villages or Forts.
•	 Remove four pieces:
o	 Remove one British Regular (counts as 2).
o	 Remove one Tory (counts as 1).
o	 Remove one British Regular (counts as 2).
o	 Remove one Tory (counts as 1).
•	 Note that British and Regulars and Tories must be completely
removed before removing Active War Parties.

The situation after removal of losses

The Casualties Box
3.6.8 Win the Day. Battle winner potentially adjusts Support/
Opposition.
•	 Win the Day occurs only in Battles with loser removing a
cube or a Fort, loser removing 2+ pieces, and not in West
Indies.
•	 Winner is the side losing the fewest pieces unless one side
is eliminated (excluding Underground War Parties and
Underground Militia), in which case the surviving side is
the winner. Defender is the winner if equal. If both sides
are eliminated (excluding Underground War Parties and
Underground Militia), there is no winner or loser.
•	 Shift Support/Opposition levels in the Battle space by half
the number of pieces the Loser removed (rounding down)
to a maximum of three levels. (If Rebellion is the winner,
Washington can double to no more than six.)
o	 If all shifts are not possible in the Battle space, British (if
Royalist winner) or Patriots (if Rebellion winner) may use
remaining shifts in adjacent spaces.
•	 If Rebellion winner, Patriots may free Rally in any one eligible
space, and French may move any Blockades from the Battle
City to another City.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

17

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

Win the Day
•	 The Rebellion is the Winner since the Royalists (the loser) and
Rebellion lost the same number of pieces (4). Defender wins ties.
o	 Note that the number of pieces removed will frequently be
different than the Loss Level.
•	 Since Royalists lost four pieces, the Patriots can shift Support 2
levels toward Active Opposition (4 pieces removed divided by 2,
rounding down) doubled to 4 levels since Washington is in the
space.
o	 Pennsylvania increases one level to Active Opposition.
o	 The Patriots choose to shift Maryland-Delaware from Active
Support three levels to Passive Opposition (an adjacent space
is shifted if no further shifts are possible in the Battle space).
•	 Note that not all pieces removed count as Casualties or go to
Casualties.
•	 Since the Patriots Win the Day, they may free Rally in any one
eligible space. The Patriots Rally in Maryland-Delaware, place
one Underground Militia.
o	 French may move any Blockades from the Battle City to another
City but, since the space is a Colony, nothing changes.

4.0 SPECIAL ACTIVITIES
4.1 Special Activities in General

When a Faction per the Event card sequence of play (2.3) executes a Command in at least one space (3.0), it may also execute
one of its Special Activities (Exception: Limited Commands,
2.3.5). Some Events grant free Special Activities (3.1.2). There is
no added Resource cost for the Special Activity. As with Commands, the executing Faction selects spaces, Factions, or pieces
affected and the order of actions. Select a given space only once
as a location for a given Special Activity. Events may grant free
Special Activities (not further affecting Eligibility, 3.1.2, 5.3).
Important: A Faction may execute its Special Activity at any
one time immediately before, during, or immediately after the
execution of its Command.
EXAMPLE: Indians with 0 Resources uses Plunder or Trade to
pay for the necessary accompanying Commands thereafter (4.1.1).
Play Note: If the 1st Eligible Faction uses a Special Activity,
the 2nd Eligible will have the option of executing the card’s
Event (2.3.4).
4.1.1. Accompanying Commands. Some Special Activities
specify that they may only accompany certain types of Commands (3.0). Certain Special Activities either must occur or
may not occur where their Accompanying Commands occurred.
If not otherwise specified, Special Activities may accompany
any Commands and take place in any otherwise valid spaces.

4.2 British Special Activities

The British may choose from Common Cause, Skirmish or
Naval Pressure Special Activities.
4.2.1 Common Cause. Common Cause allows the British to
utilize War Parties as if they were Tories. It may take place in
any spaces with British pieces and War Parties. It may accompany March or Battle.
PROCEDURE: In a Command space, the British may
utilize one or more War Parties as if they were Tories. War
Parties may never move into or between Cities. Activate War
Parties utilized.

4.2.2 Skirmish. Skirmish uses British Regulars to make a limited strike on Rebellion pieces. It may accompany any Command but not in a Battle, Garrison destination or Muster space.
PROCEDURE: In any one space or West Indies with both
British Regulars and Rebellion pieces and no Battle, Garrison destination, or Muster in the space (cubes and Forts
are removed to Casualties):
•	 Remove one Rebellion cube/Active Militia, or
•	 2 Rebellion cubes/Active Militia and one British Regular,
or
•	 If no Rebellion cubes or Active Militia, remove one Patriot
Fort and one British Regular.

4.2.3 Naval Pressure. Naval Pressure produces
Resources or decreases the level of French Naval
Intervention (FNI). It may accompany any Command.

PROCEDURE: Before TOA, add 1D3 to British Resources.
After TOA, if FNI is 0, then add 1D3 to British Resources.
If FNI > 0, lower FNI one level. British removes any one
Blockade to the West Indies.

4.3 Patriot Special Activities

Patriots may choose from Persuasion, Partisans or Skirmish
Special Activities.
4.3.1 Persuasion. Persuasion enables Patriots to
gain Resources from Colonies/Cities that are Rebellion Controlled. Patriots may Persuade in up to
three Colonies/Cities with Rebellion Control (1.7)
and Underground Militia. It may accompany any Command.
PROCEDURE: For each selected Colony/City, Activate
one Underground Militia there (1.4.3) and add one Patriot
Resource (1.8). Place one Propaganda marker in each unless
none available (there are 12).

4.3.2 Partisans. Partisans is a limited strike on Royalist pieces
in one space. The space must include Royalist pieces and at

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

18

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

least one Underground Militia (1.4.3). It may accompany any
Command but not in a Battle space.
PROCEDURE: In one space with Underground Militia and
Royalist pieces and no Battle (cubes are removed to Casualties):
•	 Activate one Underground Militia and remove any one
Royalist unit, or
•	 Activate two Underground Militia, remove one of the two
Militia and remove any two Royalist units, or
•	 If no War Parties there, Activate two Underground Militia
and remove one of the two Militia and remove one Village.

4.3.3 Skirmish. Skirmish uses Continentals to make a limited
strike on British pieces in one space. The space must include
British pieces and Continentals. It may accompany any Command but no Battle in the space.
PROCEDURE: In any one space with both Continentals
and British pieces and no Battle (cubes and Forts are removed
to Casualties):
•	 Remove one British cube, or
•	 Remove two British cube and one Continental, or
•	 If no British cubes, remove one British Fort and one
Continental.

4.4 Indian Special Activities

The Indians may choose from Trade, War Path, or Plunder
Special Activities.
4.4.1 Trade. Trade exposes War Parties for mercantile activity to
generate Resources. Trade may occur in any one Province with
an Underground War Party and a Village. It may accompany
any Command.
PROCEDURE: The British chooses an amount (or none) of
Resources to transfer to the Indians. If greater than 0, then
transfer that amount from the British to the Indians and
Activate one Underground War Party in selected Province.
if 0, then Activate one Underground War Party in the
selected Province and add one Resource.

4.4.2 War Path. War Path is a limited strike on Rebellion pieces
in one space. The space must include Rebellion pieces and at
least one Underground War Party (1.4.3). It may accompany
any Command.

PROCEDURE: In any one space with Underground War
Parties and Rebellion pieces (cubes and Forts are removed
to Casualties):
•	 Activate one Underground War Party and remove one
Rebellion unit, or
•	 Activate two Underground War Parties, remove one of the
two War Parties and remove two Rebellion units, or
•	 If no Rebellion units, remove one Patriot Fort, Activate
two Underground War Parties and remove one of the two
War Parties.
4.4.3 Plunder. Plunder takes Resources from the Patriots.
Plunder may only occur where War Parties exceed Rebellion
pieces. It may only accompany a Raid Command.
PROCEDURE: In one Province where there is a Raid
Command and War Parties exceed Rebellion pieces, remove
Resources equal to that Province’s population from the Patriots. Add that number of Resources to the Indians. Indians
remove one War Party from that Province.

4.5 French Special Activities

French may choose only Préparer la Guerre before Treaty of
Alliance. After Treaty of Alliance the French may choose
from Préparer la Guerre, Skirmish, or Naval Pressure Special
Activities.
4.5.1 Préparer la Guerre. Préparer la Guerre allows the French
to make preparations for war and make French Regulars and
Squadrons/Blockades Available. It may accompany any Command.
PROCEDURE: Move either one Squadron/Blockade marker
to West Indies or three Regulars from the Unavailable Forces
box (1.3.9) to the Available Forces box. The French may
alternatively add two Resources to French Resources.

4.5.2 Skirmish. After Treaty of Alliance, Skirmish uses
French Regulars to make a limited strike on British pieces. It
may accompany any Command but French Agent Mobilization,
and not in a Battle or Muster space.
PROCEDURE: In one space or the West Indies with both
French Regulars and British pieces and no Battle or Muster
(cubes and Forts are removed to Casualties):
•	 Remove one British cube, or
•	 Remove two British cubes and one French Regular, or
•	 If no British cubes, remove one British Fort and one French
Regular.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

19

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

4.5.3 Naval Pressure. After Treaty of Alliance,
Naval Pressure increases the level of French Naval
Intervention (FNI). It may accompany any Command but French Agent Mobilization.

PROCEDURE: Raise FNI one level. FNI may not be higher
than the number of Squadron/Blockade available to place on
Cities. The French either:
•	 Remove a Squadron marker from the West Indies and place
it on any City on its Blockade side, or
•	 If no Squadron/Blockade markers are in the West Indies,
rearrange Blockade markers already on Cities to any Cities.

5.1.4 Brilliant Stroke cards are Events held by a Faction
and may have preconditions for play. They Trump other Event
cards, including Faction order. The executing Faction must
execute the Event described on the card (2.3.8).
Period Event
years

Card Number
Illustration

Faction flags

Title

Musket (8.1)

Italicized
flavor text

Event text

Shaded Text
(See Dual
Use 5.2)

Note: There is no limit to the number of Blockades that may
be placed on one City.

5.0 Events
Each Event bears a title, card number, Period Event years, italicized flavor text, and Event text. Flavor text provides historical
interest and has no effect on play.

5.1 Executing Events

When a Faction executes an Event, it carries out the Event
text literally (sometimes involving actions or decisions by other
Factions). Unless otherwise specified, the executing Faction
makes all selections involved in implementing the text, such as
which pieces are affected or which Faction will execute a Free
Command (5.3). If another Faction is specified or selected to
take an action, that Faction decides the details of the action.
5.1.1 Where Event text contradicts rules, the Event takes
precedence. However:
•	 Events may not violate stacking (and so never place Forts/
Villages where there are already two nor place French pieces
on the Map before the Treaty of Alliance card has been
played (2.3.9)).
•	 Events place only Available pieces (1.4.1) and markers unless
specifying from Unavailable, Casualties or West Indies; they
remove rather than replace if the replacement is not Available
or if stacking (1.4.2) would be violated.
•	 Events may not raise a Faction’s Resources beyond 50 or
below 0 (1.8).

Note: Muskets or Swords below Faction symbols regard
Non-player instructions (8.1).

5.2 Dual Use

Many Events have both unshaded and shaded Event text. The
executing Faction may select either the unshaded or shaded
text to carry out (not both). The unshaded text helps the British
and/or Indians while the shaded text often favors the Patriots
and/or French. A Faction may select either text option regardless of Faction.

Design Note

Dual-use events represent opposed effects of the same cause,
forks in the historical road, or instances subject to alternative
historical interpretation.

5.3 Free Commands

Some Events allow the Executing or another Faction an immediate Command or Special Activity that interrupts the usual
sequence of play and typically is free: it bears no Resource cost
to any Faction involved and does not affect Eligibility (3.1.2,
2.3.1), though other requirements remain unless Trumped by
Event text (5.1.1).

5.1.2 If two Events contradict, the currently played Event takes
precedence.
5.1.3 An executed Event’s text that can be implemented must
be. If not all of its text can be carried out, implement that
which can.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

20

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

6.0 Winter Quarters Round
When a Winter Quarters card is turned up, stop
play and swap it with the played card. Conduct a
Winter Quarters Round in the sequence of phases
below for each Winter Quarters card. The Sequence of Play sheet and board also list this sequence. Note
that each Winter Quarters card has an event that will take
effect at the end of the Reset Phase of the Winter Quarters
Round.

6.1 Victory Check Phase

If any Faction has met its victory conditions (all victory conditions are positive for at least one Faction), the game ends
(exceptions: Non-player option; one-player). See victory (7.2)
to determine winner and rank order. Otherwise, continue with
the Winter Quarters Round. After conducting the final Winter Quarters card’s Winter Quarters Round Support Phase
(6.4.3), determine victory per 7.2.

6.2 Supply Phase

6.2.1 Extended Supply Lines: Check each Faction’s units to
see if they are in supply:
British: British cubes are in supply if they are in a space with
a British Fort or in a City with British Control.
If not, the British must:
•	 Pay one Resource per space, or
•	 Remove cubes to Available, or
•	 Shift the space one level toward Active Opposition. If no
shift possible and no Resource paid, remove to Available.
Note: This does not apply to British Regulars in the West
Indies.

Patriots: Patriot Militia and Continentals are in supply if they
are in a space with a Patriot Fort, or a Colony or City with
Rebellion Control.
If not, the Patriots may either pay one Resource per space or
remove one for every two total Patriot units there (rounding
down) to Available.
French: French Regulars are in supply if they are in a space
with a Patriot Fort, or a Colony or City with Rebellion Control.
If not, French may either move those units to the nearest space
with a Rebellion Fort or pay one Resource per space. If not
possible, return these French Regulars to Available.

6.2.2 West Indies Battle: French must conduct a free Battle in
the West Indies if French and British pieces are present, per
the Battle Procedure (3.6). French then British may return any
friendly remaining units to Available and/or pay one Resource
if any remain.

6.3 Resources Phase

Add Resources to each Faction as follows, to a maximum of 50:
6.3.1 British Earnings: Add to Resources the number of British Forts plus population of non-Blockaded British Controlled
Cities. +5 if British Control West Indies.
6.3.2 Indians Earnings: Add to Resources half the number of
Villages on the map (rounding down).
6.3.3 Patriots Earnings: Add to Resources the number of Patriot Forts plus half the number of Rebellion Controlled spaces
not including the West Indies (rounding down).
6.3.4 French Earnings: Before TOA: Add to Resources two
times Squadron/Blockade markers in West Indies. After TOA:
Add to Resources FNI level plus population of Cities not British
Controlled. +5 if Rebellion Controls West Indies.

6.4 Support Phase

The British then the Patriots may spend Resources to affect
Support and Opposition. The game ends if this is the final
Winter Quarters Round.
6.4.1 Reward Loyalty. The British may spend Resources to build
Support in British Controlled spaces with both one or more
British Regulars and one or more Tories. Every one Resource
spent removes one Raid or Propaganda marker—once no Raid
or Propaganda is in a space—shifts it one level toward Active
Support to a maximum of two levels per space.
6.4.2 Committees of Correspondence. The Patriots may spend
Resources to encourage Opposition in Rebellion Controlled
spaces with Patriot pieces. Every one Resource spent removes
one Raid marker or—once no Raid is in a space—shifts it one
level toward Active Opposition to a maximum of two levels
per space.
6.4.3 Game End? If this the final Winter Quarters Round
(2.4.1), the game ends. See Victory (7.3). If not, continue with
the Redeployment Phase.
Note: The final round omits Redeployment Phase, Desertion
Phase, and Reset Phase (6.5-6.7).

Note: This does not apply to French Regulars in the West
Indies.

Indians: If no Villages are on the map, Indians place one Village in any one Indian Reserve Province. Indian War Parties are
in supply if they are in a space with a Village or in an Indian
Reserve Province.
If not, the Indians may either pay one Resource per space or
move the War Parties to the nearest Province with a Village.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

6.5 Redeployment Phase

6.5.1 Leader Change. Consult the Event card on deck. If
possible, the first Faction on that card must make a Leader
Change. The Leader Change Summary below shows the Leader
progression from the current Leader. If no further changes can
be made for that Faction, then no action is taken. The French do
not make Leader Changes until after the Treaty of Alliance
has been played. If the Leader is changed, set aside the current
Leader marker and replace it with the new Leader marker.
Leader Change Summary

British:
•	 If Gage, replace with Howe.
•	 If Howe, replace with Clinton.
•	 If Clinton, no further Leader Changes.

6.7 Reset Phase

Prepare for the next card as follows:
•	 Remove all Raid and Propaganda markers.
•	 Mark all Factions Eligible.
•	 Move cubes from the Casualties box to their Available box.
•	 Flip all Militia and War Parties to Underground.
•	 Reveal the draw deck’s new top card.
•	 Resolve any applicable Event on the Winter Quarters
card.

7.0 Victory
Each Faction has two victory conditions. These victory conditions are specified below and on the Faction player aid sheets.
During victory checks (6.1, 7.2) the two victory conditions are
checked separately; at the end of the game (6.4.3, 7.3) they are
combined into a single total victory margin for each Faction.

French
•	 No changes before Treaty of Alliance.
•	 If Rochambeau, replace with Lauzun.
•	 If Lauzun, no further Leader Changes.

Indians
•	 If Joseph Brant, replace with Cornplanter.
•	 If Cornplanter, replace with Dragging Canoe.
•	 If Dragging Canoe, no further Leader Changes.
Patriots
•	 No Leader Changes.

6.5.2 Leader Redeployment. Each Faction may redeploy its
Leader marker to a space with same Faction’s pieces or Available
in the following order: Indians, French, British and Patriots.
6.5.3 British Release Date. British move pieces from Unavailable box to Available box on the British Release Date Schedule
in the Scenario instructions. If there are fewer units in the
Unavailable box than are to be moved to the Available box,
then move only those that are in Unavailable.
6.5.4 French Naval Intervention (After Treaty of Alliance).
Lower FNI one level. Remove one Blockade to West Indies.
The French may rearrange any remaining Blockades on Cities.

6.6 Desertion Phase

21

6.6.1 Patriot Desertion. Remove 1 in 5 Militia and 1 in 5
Continentals from the map (rounding down). Indians choose
the first Militia and first Continental to desert, then Patriots
choose the remainder.
6.6.2 Tory Desertion. Remove 1 in 5 Tories from the map
(rounding down). French choose the first Tory to desert, then
British choose the remainder.

7.1 Ranking Wins and Breaking Ties

During the Winter Quarters Round Victory Check Phase (6.1,
7.2), both of a Faction’s victory conditions must have a positive
victory margin in order to win the game. The victory margin
is the amount a Faction is beyond or short of its condition set
forth below. During the final Winter Quarters Round Support
Phase victory calculation (6.4.3, 7.3), both measures are netted together and the highest net measure wins (neither victory
margin needs to be positive).
If any Non-player Faction passes a victory check (7.2), all players
lose equally. Whenever a player Faction passes a victory check
(6.1), the Faction on that side with the highest victory margin
takes first place and the other Faction on that side takes second.
The Faction on the other side that reached the highest victory
margin takes 3rd place, and the other Faction on that Side takes
4th. Also, if the Treaty of Alliance Event was not played,
the French come in last place (regardless of their margin or
whether they are a Non-player).
Ties are resolved in order of Non-players, the Patriots, British,
French and Indian Factions.
If playing solitaire, see also One-Player Victory (8.8).

7.2 During The Victory Check Phase

Check victory at the start of each Winter Quarters Round (6.1).
In order to win, both of a Faction’s victory conditions must
have a positive victory margin (otherwise there is no winner,
in which case play continues). For the French to win, Treaty
of Alliance also must have been played.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

22

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

Victory conditions are:
•	 British: 1. Support exceeds Opposition by more than 10 and
2. Cumulative Rebellion Casualties (CRC) is greater than
Cumulative British Casualties (CBC).
•	 Patriots: 1. Opposition exceeds Support by more than 10 and
2. Patriot Forts plus 3 is greater than Villages.
•	 French: 1. Opposition exceeds Support by more than 10
and 2. Cumulative British Casualties (CBC) is greater
than Cumulative Rebellion Casualties (CRC). Treaty of
Alliance must have been played.
•	 Indians: 1. Support exceeds Opposition by more than 10 and
2. Villages less 3 is greater than Patriot Forts.
EXAMPLE: It is the Victory Check Phase (6.1) of the first Winter
Quarters Round of the 1776 Medium Duration Scenario. The relevant side track markers are as follows:
Support: 17
Opposition: 5
Cumulative British Casualties (CBC): 5
Cumulative Rebellion Casualties (CRC): 4
Patriot Forts: 3
Indian Villages: 5
French have not played Treaty of Alliance card

Victory conditions are:
•	British: Support less Opposition plus Cumulative Rebellion
Casualties (CRC) less Cumulative British Casualties (CBC).
•	Patriots: Opposition less Support plus Patriot Forts plus 3
less Villages.
•	French: Opposition less Support plus Cumulative British
Casualties (CBC) less Cumulative Rebellion Casualties
(CRC). Treaty of Alliance must have been played.
•	Indians: Support less Opposition plus Villages less 3 less
Patriot Forts.
EXAMPLE: It is the Support Phase (6.4) of the fourth (last)
Winter Quarters Round of the 1776 Medium Duration Scenario
and it is the Game End (6.4.3). The relevant side track markers
are as follows:

The following is the victory check by Faction:

British: Support does exceed Opposition by more than 10 (17–
5=12) but CRC (4) is not greater than CBC (5) so the British do
not meet their victory conditions.
Patriots: Opposition does not exceed Support by more than 10 (5–
17= –12) but Patriot Forts plus 3 (3+3=6) is greater than Villages
(5) so the Patriots do not meet their victory conditions.

French: Opposition does not exceed Support by more than 10 (5–
17= –12) but CBC (5) is greater than CRC (4). In any case, the
Treaty of Alliance card has not been played so the French do not
meet their victory conditions.
Indians: Support does exceed Opposition by more than 10 (17–
5=12) but Villages less 3 (5–3=2) is not greater than Patriot Forts
(3) so the Indians do not meet their victory conditions.
Since no Faction has achieved all positive victory conditions, there
is no winner and play continues.

Combined Victory: A player running both Factions of one side
achieves a combined Royalist or Rebellion win at victory check
if all of both the player’s Factions’ victory conditions are fulfilled.

7.3 During The Support Phase

Note: Positive victory margins are not required to win at
Game End. (6.4.3) A player running both Factions of one
side uses the worse of the two Factions’ total victory margins.
The French cannot win without having played the Treaty
of Alliance card.

If the final Winter Quarters Round (2.4.1) Support Phase is
completed without a victory check win (7.2), the victory margin for the two victory conditions for each Faction are added
together to determine its total victory margin. The Faction with
the highest total victory margin wins.

Support: 24
Opposition: 27
Cumulative British Casualties (CBC): 12
Cumulative Rebellion Casualties (CRC): 16
Patriot Forts: 6
Indian Villages: 8
French have played Treaty of Alliance card

The following is the victory margin calculation by Faction:

British: Support (24) less Opposition (27) plus CRC (16) less
CBC (12) = 1.
Patriots: Opposition (27) less Support (24) plus Patriot Forts (6)
plus 3 less Villages (8) = 4.

French: Opposition (27) less Support (24) plus CBC (12) less
CRC (16) = –1. Treaty of Alliance was played.

Indians: Support (24) less Opposition (27) plus Villages (8) less 3
less Patriot Forts (6) = –4.

As it is the Support Phase (6.4) of the final Winter Quarters Round
(2.4.1), the Faction with the highest victory margin is the winner
and teams place in descending order.
First place: Patriots with a 4 victory margin.

Second place: British with a 1 victory margin.
Third place: French with a –1 victory margin.

Fourth place: Indians with a –4 victory margin.

STOP!

You have read all rules needed for four players or the No
Non-Player option with two or three players. (1.5, recommended for first-time play)

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

23

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

8.0 Non-Player Factions
This section governs actions by any Factions beyond those
represented by a player, for solitaire or as an alternative to the
No Non-Player option for two or three players (1.5). See also
the Playbook’s Non-Player Examples of Play.
Each Non-player Faction has a flowchart determining its actions. Due to space constraints, the instructions on the flowcharts are often heavily abbreviated. They are also described in
more detail in rule sections 8.4 - 8.7, so whenever the flowcharts
seem unclear, please refer to the rulebook.
Note: In the flowcharts, the short-hands “Rebel” and “Pop”
are used instead of “Rebellion” and “Population” respectively.
Note: Non-player Factions may not act only in their own
direct interest. Like players, they sometimes help, sometimes
harm, one another.
Important: If playing solitaire, be sure to read the special
one-player victory conditions (8.8) before you start!

8.1 Non-Player Sequence of Play

The Non-player flowcharts describe the order in which the Nonplayers attempt to execute the options available to them. Options that would be illegal to execute are ignored. Non-players
must follow all rules in chapters 1-7 except for the following:
•	 Commands Not Limited. Whenever a Non-player Faction
by the Sequence of Play (2.3.4) is to execute a Limited
Command (2.3.5), it instead executes a full Command and
Special Activity. Non-players execute free LimComs granted
by Event (5.3) normally as LimComs, using the flowchart
to select the Command but executing it in a maximum of
one space (or with a maximum of one destination space, as
appropriate for the Command selected) and with no Special
Activity (unless the Event grants that too).
•	 No voluntary removal. Non-player Factions never use the
1.4.1 option to take their own forces from the map in order
to place them elsewhere when they have no appropriate pieces
Available.
•	 Event, Command or Pass? If a Non-player Faction has the
option to execute an Event, look at that Faction’s symbol on
the card. If it is underlined by a sword icon (
), the
Faction will automatically ignore the Event and continue with
the flowchart, otherwise the conditions listed in the “Event
or Command?” box on the flowchart determines whether or
not the Non-player will opt for the Event. If the Faction’s
symbol is underlined by a Brown Bess Musket icon (
),
there are special Event Instructions (8.3.1) on the back of
the Random Spaces sheet that can affect this decision. If
the Faction does not play the Event, follow the flowchart to
see whether it Passes (2.3.3) or executes a Command and
Special Activity.
•	 Paying Resource Costs. A Non-player Faction that has too
few Resources to pay even the minimum amount possible for
the selected Command (e.g., Non-player French attempting

to Muster with only 1 Resource to spend) immediately follows
the flowchart instructions as if the Faction were unable to
execute any of the instructions for the Command, until
another Command that it can afford to execute is found.
The same applies if an allied Faction is unable to pay for a
combined Command (e.g., if Non-player Indians attempt
to Scout (3.4.3) but the British are unable to pay). If it has
sufficient Resources to execute at least some instructions of
the selected Command, it pays the appropriate Resource
cost when it selects each space, or as soon as any instruction
of the Command itself is executed (i.e., not counting any
accompanying Special Activity) in case the Command is of
a type that does not select any specific space (e.g., Garrison
(8.4.1) or Roderigue Hortalez et Cie (8.6.1, 8.6.3)).
•	 Brilliant Strokes. Non-player French plays the Treaty
of Alliance as soon as they are Eligible (even if not 1st or
2nd Eligible), and the sum of Squadrons in WI + Available
French Regulars + half of Cumulative British Casualties
exceed 15, and no Winter Quarters card is showing. Nonplayer Factions will not play any other Brilliant Stroke
Events until the Treaty of Alliance has been played, and
then only when certain Faction-specific conditions apply
(8.4.11, 8.5.8, 8.6.11, 8.7.8). Rule 8.3.7 describes Non-player
execution of these Brilliant Stroke Events.
Note: While the entire CBC counts towards allowing the
Treaty of Alliance for players, Non-player French only
count only half of it in order to ensure that they have a reasonable number of Regulars in play before entering the war.

	
•	 Non-player Leader Movement. During Campaigns, Nonplayer Leaders follow the largest group of units from their
own Faction that moves from (or stays in) their origin space.
If two or more such groups are of the same size, select which
one the Leader joins randomly.
8.1.1 Events, Commands, and Special Activities
To execute an Event with a Non-player, follow the section below
about Non-player Events and any individual Event instructions
on the reverse of the Random Spaces sheet (8.3.1). To execute a
Non-player Faction’s Commands and Special Activities, see the
Non-Player flow charts and the rules section below governing
that Faction’s actions.

Guidelines:

Unless otherwise specified, carry out whatever actions apply
to the maximum extent (such as in the most spaces or with
the most pieces allowed and only as long as needed pieces
and Resources are available). Normal Resource costs, requirements, and procedures apply.
The terms “most Support” and “most Opposition” refer to
the value a space contributes to the Total Support or Total
Opposition score, i.e., the Support or Opposition level times
the Population of the space.
EXAMPLE: Non-player Indian Raid Activates one Underground War Party and costs one Resource per Colony, per 3.4.4.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

24

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

EXAMPLE: When Non-player French execute Roderigue Hortalez et Cie, it spends “up to 1D3 French Resources”, meaning that
it will spend Resources equal to the number rolled if it has at least
that many Resources, otherwise it will spend all the Resources it
has.
Play Note: To more easily implement Commands that move
pieces (March, Garrison, Raid, Scout, 8.4-8.7), first identify
which pieces can move, then their destinations.
8.1.2 Pieces and Resources. The Random Spaces sheet summarizes the following. Unless the instruction or Event text being
executed specify which pieces to place, remove or move, once
spaces involved are selected, Non-player Factions:
•	 As far as possible, place friendly Forts and Villages, then
Militia or War Parties, then alternating Regulars and
Continentals/Tories beginning with whichever is fewest in
the space (Regulars if even).
•	 Remove friendly pieces, first alternating Regulars and
Continentals/Tories, beginning with whichever is most in
the space (Regulars if even) but if possible without removing
the last Tory/Continental in any space, then Active before
Underground Militia or War Parties, and finally Forts and
Villages.
•	 Move friendly pieces from Unavailable first if possible, then
from Available. Move Unavailable or Casualty pieces and
markers to Available or the map in this order: Blockades,
Forts, Continentals/ Tories, then Regulars.
•	 As far as possible, target or remove enemy Forts and Villages,
then Militia or War Parties, then alternating Regulars and
Continentals/Tories beginning with whichever is fewest
in the space (Regulars if even). Within that, target enemy
Underground Militia or War Parties before Active ones.
•	 Remove enemy pieces to be replaced even if no pieces are
available to replace them. (For friendly pieces, see 8.3.3.)
•	 March so as to get as many Underground Militia or War
Parties as possible to the destination (3.3.2, 3.4.2). Within
that requirement, March Active Militia or War Parties first.

8.1.3 Selecting Spaces. When executing Commands and Special
Activities by the priorities on the Non-Player flowcharts (8.4
to 8.7), select spaces for each listed priority in order until there
are no more legal candidate spaces or actions for that priority,
or until any space limit within that priority is reached. Then
move on to the next priority and do the same, until any overall
space limit for the Command or Special Activity is reached, or
until the Faction runs out of Resources (if applicable). Break
ties within each priority by selecting equal candidates randomly
as described below (8.2), unless a subsequent priority explicitly
modifies the selection (using a “within…” or similar statement).

8.2 Random Spaces

If several candidate Province or Cities have equal priority for
a Non-player Command, Special Activity, or Event, select one
using the Random Spaces table:

•	 Roll 1D3 to find the column on the table, and 1D6 to find
the row. If the box names two spaces, choose the top space
first if possible.

	 Note: The boxes show Population of each space.
	 EXAMPLE: Choose Florida before South Carolina.
•	 If the resulting space is not a candidate, move down the
column until one is reached. Follow the arrows, moving from
the bottom of one column to the top of the next and from
Massachusetts to Quebec City (or just follow the arrows on
the Random Spaces Map).
•	 Carry out as much of the action as possible in the candidate
space reached, then roll again to select another space only if
needed.
Play Note: If players agree, choose among a few spaces by
equal chance die roll instead.

8.3 Non-Player Events

Note: Events will not always benefit the executing Non-player
Faction directly.

8.3.1 Event Instructions. If the Faction Symbol is underlined by
a Brown Bess Musket icon (
), there are special instructions for that Event on the reverse side of the Random Spaces
sheet. These instructions can affect whether the Faction plays
the Event or continues with the flowchart, e.g., by making the
Event Ineffective (8.3.3).
When a Faction plays an Event that gives free Commands or
Special Activities (5.3) to another Non-player Faction, or forces
it to make other choices (e.g., to remove some of its pieces),
the 2nd Faction’s Event instructions (if any) apply to how it
executes those actions.
8.3.2 Dual-Use Events. Unless Event Instructions (8.3.1) say
otherwise, Non-player Patriot and French executing a DualUse Event (5.2) use the shaded text, while Non-player British
and Indian use unshaded text. If there is only one Event Text,
all Factions use it.
8.3.3 Ineffective Events. If an Event, after any Event Instructions (8.3.1) are taken into account, would have no effect at
all (not even manipulating Eligibility), or where the only effect would be to remove one or more friendly pieces without
replacing them with other friendly pieces, or the Event shifts

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

the difference between Support and Opposition in favor of the
enemy side, a Non-player Faction will consider it to be Ineffective and choose a Command and Special Activity instead.
EXAMPLE: Non-player British are 1st Eligible for card #62
Charles Michel de Langlade. The British symbol on this card
is underlined with a musket, and the Event Instructions specify
that the British will only place Tories in New York Colony if it
is at Active Opposition and there are no Tories there already. At
the moment New York Colony is at Passive Support, so the British
will not place any Tories there. Following the Event Instructions
the Event would have no effect, so the British execute a Command
and Special Activity instead.

EXAMPLE: Non-player Indians are 1st Eligible for card #73
“Sullivan Expedition vs Iroquois and Tories”. There are Indian
Villages and British Forts in New York, Northwest and Quebec,
but no Patriot Forts. Since all pieces that could be removed by the
Event text are all friendly to the Indians, Non-player Indians will
treat the Event as Ineffective and choose a Command and Special
Activity instead.

8.3.4 Event Placement. Place, remove, or relocate as many
pieces (per 8.1.2) as Events, availability (1.4.1), and stacking
(1.4.2) allow. When allowed and unless otherwise specified,
Non-player Factions place or move friendly pieces from out of
Unavailable then from Available.
8.3.5 Events: Who, What, and Where. Unless the Event text
or Event instruction (8.3.1) says otherwise:
•	 When there is a choice of who gets Event benefits (such
as Resources, free Commands, or placing pieces), select the
executing Faction, then the other friendly Faction, then a
random enemy, Non-player first. If the Event effects are
harmful (such as removing pieces, Activating War Parties or
Militia, or similar), select a random enemy, player first.
•	 For any choices as part of free Commands (including
Limited Commands) or Special Activities, use that Faction’s
priorities (8.4-8.7). For multiple free Commands (such as
“March then Battle”), use the priorities for the first. Where
the priorities are not applicable, choose pieces per 8.1.2 and
spaces randomly (8.2).
Note: If there is a choice among free Commands, use the
Faction’s flowchart to select one, ignoring any flowchart
instructions to play Events or Pass. If there is a choice
among free Special Activities without a Command, follow
the flowcharts to see which Command and Special Activity
is selected, but execute only the Special Activity.

	
•	 If a Non-player Faction executes an Event due to one of the
“Event or Command?” questions on the flowchart, select
as many spaces as possible that match that question before
selecting other spaces (if any).
•	 Select spaces for shifts in Support or Opposition per 8.3.6
below.
•	 Within the above (if applicable), select Event spaces to
ensure that as many Forts and Villages then other pieces as
possible are placed, removed, or replaced. When removing
enemy pieces, use the priorities in 8.1.2 above. If friendly

25

pieces are to be removed and there is a choice, remove the
other Faction’s pieces.
•	 Otherwise, select spaces randomly (8.2).
EXAMPLE: There is a British Regular but no Tories in Active
Support North Carolina. Non-player British are eligible to play
Event #43 “HMS Russian Merchant with 4,000 Muskets”, which
allows it to place up to two Tories in each of three spaces with British Regulars. This meets the “Event or Command?” condition “The
Event places Tories in an Active Opposition space with none already, a British Fort in a Colony with none already, or any Regulars.”, so the British play the Event and select North Carolina as
the first space in which to place Tories.

8.3.6 Events that Shift Support/Opposition. Unless otherwise
specified, Non-player Factions select spaces for Event effects
that shift Support or Opposition as follows:
•	 Royalist Factions for the highest gain in Support, then the
highest loss in Opposition. If the difference between Support
and Opposition would shift in favor of the Rebellion, the
Royalist Non-player Faction instead executes a Command
and Special Activity.
•	 Rebellion Factions for the highest gain in Opposition,
then the highest loss in Support. If the difference between
Opposition and Support would shift in favor of the Royalists,
the Rebellion Non-player Faction instead executes a
Command and Special Activity.
8.3.7 Brilliant Stroke. Non-player British, Indians and
French holding a Brilliant Stroke card other than the
Treaty of Alliance will play when the Treaty of Alliance
has been played, that Faction is Eligible, no Winter Quarters
card is showing, and the Faction’s specific conditions for playing
the card are met (8.4.11, 8.5.8, 8.6.11, 8.7.8). If two or three
Non-players play Brilliant Stroke at the same time, they
trump one another normally.
To execute a Brilliant Stroke Event other than the Treaty
of Alliance, follow the executing Faction’s flowchart to select
the first Limited Command that both matches the flowchart
priorities and can involve that Faction’s Leader. If no such
Limited Command is possible, the Brilliant Stroke play
is aborted. Use the flowchart to select the Special Activity to
match the first Command, but if possible execute it independently (e.g., ignoring what spaces were selected for a LimCom
Muster or Garrison Command when executing a Skirmish
Special Activity). Then use the flowchart again to select the
second Limited Command.
Note: This is less flexible than a human player’s execution
of a Brilliant Stroke, but ensures that the Non-player’s
Brilliant Stroke play will be legal. An example of Nonplayer British execution of a Brilliant Stroke Event can
be found in the Playbook.

8.3.8 Other Event Choices. When a Non-player Faction while
executing an Event has a choice that is not otherwise covered
above, choose randomly among the possibilities.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

26

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

8.4 Non-Player British Actions

When Non-player British are 1st or 2nd Eligible, they will
ignore the Event if the British Faction Symbol is underlined
with a sword. Otherwise, if they are Eligible to play the Event,
check any relevant Event Instructions (8.3.1), and execute the
unshaded Event text if at least one of the following conditions
are met:
•	 Opposition exceeds Support, and the Event will shift
Opposition and/or Support in favor of the Royalist side
(including by removing a Blockade from a Support City by
reducing FNI, but not by free Battles).
•	 The Event places any British pieces from Unavailable.
•	 The Event places Tories in an Active Opposition space with
none already, a British Fort in a Colony with none already,
or any Regulars in a City or Colony.
•	 The Event inflicts Rebellion Casualties (including a free
Skirmish or Battle, applying any additional conditions in
8.4.4 or 8.4.1).
•	 The British Control at least five Cities, the Event is Effective
(8.3.3), and a D6 rolls “5” or higher.
If the British do not play the Event, they execute a Command
and Special Activity if British Resources exceed 0, otherwise
Pass (2.3.3).
8.4.1 Garrison. If the British are to execute a Command and
have a total of 10 or more Regulars in all Cities and Provinces
on the map combined, and a City without a Patriot Fort is
Rebellion Controlled, the British Garrison (3.2.2) as follows:
•	 First execute Naval Pressure, or if that is not possible,
Skirmish.
•	 Then Garrison. When executing movements per the bullets
below, leave two more Royalist than Rebellion pieces in each
origin space with British Control, and remove the last Regular
only from spaces with Population 0 or Active Support. Do
not move Regulars to any City where a Skirmish has been
executed.
o	 Move just enough Regulars to add British Control of Cities,
first where there are the most Rebellion pieces without a
Patriot Fort, then to New York City, then random.
o	Then move additional Regulars, first to give each British
Controlled City without Active Support at least one
Regular, then to give each British Controlled City at least
three British cubes of any types beginning with those Cities
that have Underground Militia.
•	 If no Regulars have moved yet, abort the Garrison Command
and execute a Muster (8.4.2) instead.
•	 If any Regulars did move, Activate Underground Militia
everywhere possible, then displace the largest possible
number of Rebellion pieces, first to a Province with the most
Opposition then with least Support, within that to the lowest
Population possible.

NAVAL PRESSURE: Execute Naval Pressure as follows:
•	 If FNI > 0 and Gage or Clinton is the British Leader, remove
one Blockade, first from a City selected for Battle, then from
the City with most Rebellion pieces without a Patriot Fort,
then from the City with the most Support.
•	 Otherwise, if FNI is 0, add +1D3 British Resources.
•	 If neither of the above is possible, instead Skirmish.
SKIRMISH: Execute Skirmish as follows:
Skirmish first in the West Indies, then where there is exactly
one British Regular, then per the highest priority possible in
the bullets below:
•	 Remove as many Rebellion cubes as possible, first whichever
type is least in the space, removing one British Regular if
necessary.
•	 If it is not possible to remove any Rebellion cubes, instead
remove one Rebellion piece, first where there is only one
Rebellion piece in a space, within that first in a City.
•	 If Clinton is in the space, remove one additional Militia if
possible.
•	 If no Skirmish is possible, instead execute Naval Pressure.
If that is not possible either, the British execute no Special
Activity.

8.4.2 British Muster. If the British did not select Garrison and
a D6 roll is less than the number of British Regulars Available,
or if the British selected a Garrison or March Command but
were unable to execute any of the instructions, they Muster
(3.2.1) in up to four spaces as follows:
•	 Place as many Regulars as possible, first in spaces that are
Neutral or at either Passive Opposition or Passive Support,
then elsewhere; within that first to add British Control,
then where Tories are the only British units present, then
elsewhere; within each of those first in the spaces with highest
Population.
•	 Then place Tories, first where Regulars are the only British
units (within that, first where Regulars were placed above),
then to change Control of the most Population, then in
Colonies with less than five British Cubes and no British
Fort.
•	 Then Reward Loyalty or place a Fort, if possible in one of the
spaces already selected above, otherwise if fewer than four
spaces have been selected yet in one additional Muster space:
o	 If Opposition exceeds Support + 1D3 or if no British Forts
are Available, Reward Loyalty in one space per 8.4.5.
o	 If no Reward Loyalty was executed, place a Fort in a Colony
with no British Fort already, five or more British cubes and
room. Remove British cubes per 8.1.2.
•	 If any of the Muster instructions above were executed and
no Special Activity has been used yet, also Skirmish (8.4.1)
or, if that is not possible, Naval Pressure (8.4.1).
IF NONE: If no Muster is possible, then March (8.4.3) or, if
that is not possible either, Pass (2.3.3).

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

8.4.3 British March. If the British did not select either Garrison
or Muster, and there is no space (nor WI) with both British
and at least 2 Active Rebellion pieces where British Regulars
plus Leader outnumber all Rebellion pieces plus Leaders, or
if the British selected a Battle or Muster Command but were
unable to execute any of the instructions, then March (3.2.3)
in or into up to four destination spaces as follows:
•	 When executing the bullets below, do not move any pieces
needed for British Control of the origin space, nor remove
the last Tory or War Party from any space, nor the last British
Regular from a space with British Control but no Active
Support.
o	 First identify all groups of British units able to March.
o	Moving the largest groups first, add British Control to
Cities, then Colonies (but not Indian Reserve Provinces),
for a total of up to two spaces; within each first where there
are Rebellion cubes, then with the highest Population. Stop
moving groups into each destination space once British
Control is established. Use Common Cause to include
War Parties (Active first) if this would increase the size of
a Marching group moving into an adjacent Province.
o	 Then March to spaces with Population one or two that are
not at Active Support, first to add Tories where Regulars are
the only British units, then to add Regulars where Tories
are the only British units; within each, move first to March
destinations already selected above.
o	 Then March in place to Activate Underground Militia, first
in spaces with Support.
If no Common Cause was used during the March, instead
Skirmish or Naval Pressure per 8.4.1.
IF NONE: If no March is possible, the British instead Muster
(8.4.2) or, if that is not possible, Pass (2.3.3).
COMMON CAUSE: If the British either March to add British Control or Battle, they use Common Cause to make up the
difference between the number of Regulars and Tories in the
group, except as follows:
•	 If March, do not use the last War Party (Underground if
possible) in the space.
•	 If Battle, do not use the last Underground War Party in the
space.

8.4.4 British Battle. If the British did not select either Garrison
or Muster, and there is at least one space (including WI) with
at least two Rebellion pieces that are outnumbered by British
Regulars+Leader, Battle (3.2.4) as follows:
•	 Select all spaces (and WI) with Rebellion Forts and/or cubes
where the Royalist Force Level plus modifiers exceeds the
Rebellion Force Level plus modifiers, first where there are
most British pieces. Use Common Cause (8.4.3) wherever
possible to increase the British Force Level.
•	 If Common Cause cannot increase the Force Level in any
Battle space, instead Skirmish (8.4.1) in a space not selected
for Battle, or if that is not possible, Naval Pressure (8.4.1). If
that is not possible either, execute no Special Activity.

27

•	 Then resolve Battles in all selected spaces.

IF NONE: If no spaces are selected for Battle, the British
instead March per 8.4.3 above.
8.4.5 Reward Loyalty. If more than one space is eligible to
Reward Loyalty, first select the space or spaces with the lowest
total of Raid and Propaganda markers, within that where the
largest change in (Support – Opposition) is possible. Do not
Reward Loyalty in a space if only Raid and/or Propaganda
markers would be removed.
8.4.6 Indian Trade Special Activity. If the Indians request
Trade and Indian Resources are less than British Resources,
roll 1D6: if the result is < British Resources, offer to transfer
half the number rolled (rounding up) from British Resources
to Indian Resources.
8.4.7 British Supply. In each City and Colony where British
cubes are out of supply (6.2.1), pay for supply if the cubes are
needed to prevent Committees of Correspondence or allow
Reward Loyalty during the Support Phase (6.4) given expected
British earnings from Forts and Cities (but not the West Indies)
(6.3). Pay with Resources as far as possible, first in spaces with
highest Population. In each remaining space that needs Supply,
shift one level towards Active Opposition if possible. Remove
the cubes to Available if they are not needed for the Support
Phase or if no supply is possible.
8.4.8 West Indies Battle. If the British Control the West Indies
after the Supply Phase Battle (6.2.2), pay one Resource to keep
the Regulars there. Otherwise return all British Regulars from
the West Indies to Available.
8.4.9 British Leader Redeployment. Redeploy the British
Leader (6.5.2) to the space with the most British Regulars.
8.4.10 Loyalist Desertion. Remove Tories so as to change the
least Control possible, if possible without removing the last
Tory from any space.
8.4.11 British Brilliant Stroke. Non-player British will use
its Brilliant Stroke card if the Treaty of Alliance Event has
been played, the British Leader is in a space with four or more
British Regulars, and a Rebellion player Faction is 1st Eligible
or the Patriots play their Brilliant Stroke card.

8.5 Non-Player Patriot Actions

When Non-player Patriots are 1st or 2nd Eligible, they will
ignore the Event if the Patriot Faction Symbol is underlined
with a sword. Otherwise, if they are Eligible to play the Event,
check any relevant Event Instructions (8.3.1), and execute the
Event if at least one of the following conditions are met:
•	 Support exceeds Opposition, and the Event will shift
Opposition and/or Support in favor of the Rebellion side
(including by increasing FNI, but not by free Battles).
•	 The Event places Underground Militia in at least one Active
Support or Village space that has none already.
•	 The Event places a Patriot Fort or removes an Indian Village.
•	 The Event adds at least three Patriot Resources.
•	 The Patriots have at least 25 pieces on the map, the Event is
Effective (8.3.3), and a D6 rolls “5” or higher.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

28

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

If the Patriots do not play the Event, they execute a Command
and Special Activity if Patriot Resources exceed 0, otherwise
Pass (2.3.3).
8.5.1 Patriot Battle. If any space has both Royalist pieces and
Rebellion cubes, and the total number of Rebellion cubes and
Leaders there outnumber all Active Royalist pieces combined,
the Patriots execute Battle (3.3.3) as follows:
•	 Select all spaces where the Rebellion Force Level (including as
many French as possible) plus modifiers exceeds the Royalist
Force Level plus modifiers. If Patriot Resources are too low
to pay for all such spaces, select the space with Washington
first, then the spaces with highest Population, then with the
largest number of Villages, then randomly.
•	 For each Battle space selected, if French Regulars are present
and French Resources exceed 0, pay one French Resource to
include as many French Regulars as possible.
•	 Then resolve all Battles.

If no spaces are selected for Battle, the Patriots instead Rally
(8.5.2).
For each space where the Rebellion side Wins the Day (3.6.8),
the Patriots execute a free Rally Command (8.5.2) in one
space. For each City where the Rebellion side Wins the Day,
the French may move any Blockades from that City to another
City with more Support.
If any Battles were resolved, execute a Partisans Special Activity
per below, or if that is not possible, Skirmish, or if that is not
possible, Persuasion. If none of these are possible, execute no
Special Activity.
PARTISANS: If Patriot Resources are 0, instead execute
Persuasion if possible. Otherwise, execute a Partisans Special
Activity (4.3.2) in a space with Underground Militia and enemy,
first to remove a Village, then to remove the most War Parties,
then the most British units (in both cases per the priorities in
8.1.2); within each first to add most Rebellion Control, then
to remove most British Control, then random.
SKIRMISH: If Patriot Resources are 0, instead execute Persuasion if possible. Otherwise, execute a Skirmish in a space with
Continentals and enemy, first to remove a British Fort, within
that first to add the most Rebellion Control, then to remove
the most British Control, then random.
PERSUASION: In up to three spaces with Rebellion Control
and Underground Militia, first spaces with Patriot Forts, Activate one Militia per space to add Patriot Resources.
8.5.2 Rally. If the Patriots did not select Battle, and Rally would
place a Patriot Fort or 1D6 rolls higher than the number of Underground Militia on the map, or the Patriots selected a Battle
or Rabble-Rousing Command but were unable to execute it,
the Patriots Rally (3.3.1) in up to four spaces as follows:
•	 If Patriot Resources reach 0 during the Rally, the Patriots
immediately execute a Persuasion Special Activity (8.5.1)
before continuing the Rally Command.
•	 Place a Fort in each space with 4+ Patriot units and room, first
Cities, within that first in the spaces with highest Population.

•	 Then place Militia, first at each Patriot Fort with no other
Rebellion pieces, then if any Continentals are Available at
the Fort with the largest number of Militia already.
•	 In the Patriot Fort space with most Militia of those already
selected for Rally, replace all Militia except one Underground
with Continentals.
•	 Then, if any Patriot Fort is Available, place Militia in the
space with most Patriot units already, but no Patriot Fort.
•	 Then place Militia, first to change Control, then in spaces
not at Active Opposition, within each first in Cities, within
that first in the highest Population.
•	 Then, in one Fort space not already selected above, move in
all Active Militia from adjacent spaces that can be moved
without changing Control of their origin spaces, then flip
all Militia at the Fort Underground.
Then, if no Persuasion was used during the Rally, the Patriots
execute a Partisans Special Activity per 8.5.1, or if that is not
possible Skirmish, or if that is not possible, Persuasion. If none
of these are possible, execute no Special Activity.
IF NONE: If no Rally is possible, the Patriots instead execute
Rabble-Rousing (8.5.3), or if that is not possible either, Pass
(2.3.3).
8.5.3 Rabble-Rousing. If the Patriots did not select Battle or
Rally, and Rabble-Rousing could shift any space towards Active
Opposition, or they selected a Rally or March Command but
were unable to execute it, the Patriots execute Rabble-Rousing
(3.3.4) as follows:
•	 If Patriot Resources reach 0 during Rabble-Rousing, the
Patriots immediately execute a Persuasion Special Activity
(8.5.1) before continuing the Command.
•	 Use Rabble-Rousing in each space that can be shifted towards
Active Opposition, first in spaces with Active Support, within
that first in the space with highest Population.

IF NONE: If no Rabble-Rousing is possible, the Patriots instead Rally (8.5.2), or if that is not possible either, Pass (2.3.3).
Then, if no Persuasion was used during Rabble-Rousing, the
Patriots execute a Partisans Special Activity per 8.5.1, or if that
is not possible, Skirmish, or if that is not possible, Persuasion.
If none of these are possible, execute no Special Activity.
8.5.4 Patriot March. If the Patriots did not select Battle or Rally,
and Rabble-Rousing could not shift any space towards Active
Opposition, the Patriots March (3.3.2) as follows:
•	 While executing the bullets below, lose no Rebellion Control,
leave an Active Patriot unit with each Patriot Fort, and leave
a Patriot unit (if possible an Underground Militia) in each
space that is not already at Active Opposition.
o	 First identify all groups of Patriot units able to March.
o	 Moving the largest groups first, add Rebellion Control to
two spaces, first with Villages, then Cities, then elsewhere;
within that first to the spaces with largest Population.
Stop moving groups into each destination once Rebellion
Control is established. If French Resources exceed 0,
include as many French Regulars as possible in the moves.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

o	 Then March to get one Militia (Underground if possible)
into each space with none, first to change Control of the
most Population, then elsewhere.
Then execute a Partisans Special Activity per 8.5.1, or if that is
not possible, Skirmish, or if that is not possible, Persuasion. If
none of these are possible, execute no Special Activity.
IF NONE: If no March moves can be executed, the Patriots
instead execute Rally (8.5.2).
8.5.5 Patriot Supply. The Patriots pay one Patriot Resource
for each space where removing Patriot pieces would change
Control, within those first where the British would otherwise
be able to Reward Loyalty, then in the spaces with most Villages, then with highest Population. In all other spaces where
Supply is needed, remove Patriot pieces per 8.1.2.
8.5.6 Patriot Leader Redeployment. Redeploy Washington to
the space with most Continentals.
8.5.7 Patriot Desertion. Remove Militia and Continentals so as
to change as little Control as possible, within that first without
removing the last Patriot unit from any space.
8.5.8 Patriot Brilliant Stroke. Non-player Patriots will use
its Brilliant Stroke card if the Treaty of Alliance Event
has been played, Washington is in a space with four or more
Continentals, and a player Faction is 1st Eligible.
8.5.9 Committees of Correspondence. If more than one space
is eligible for Committees of Correspondence, first select the
spaces with the lowest number of Raid markers, within that
where the largest change in (Opposition - Support) is possible.
Do not execute Committees of Correspondence in a space if
only Raid markers would be removed.

8.6 Non-Player French Actions

If Non-player French are 1st or 2nd Eligible, they will ignore
the Event if the French Faction Symbol is underlined with a
sword. Otherwise, if they are Eligible to play the Event, check
any relevant Event Instructions (8.3.1), and execute the Event
if at least one of the following conditions are met:
•	 Support exceeds Opposition, and the Event will shift
Opposition and/or Support in favor of the Rebellion side
(including by increasing FNI and placing a Blockade to
reduce Support), but not by free Battles.
•	 The Event moves French Regulars or Squadrons from
Unavailable.
•	 The Event places Available French pieces on the map.
•	 The Event inflicts British Casualties (including a free French
Battle, applying any additional priorities in 8.6.6. or 8.6.3).
•	 The Event adds French Resources.
•	The Treaty of Alliance has been played, the Event is
Effective (8.3.3), and a D6 rolls “5” or higher.
If the French do not play the Event, they execute a Command
and Special Activity if French Resources exceed 0, otherwise
Pass (2.3.3).

8.6.1 Roderigue Hortalez et Cie (before ToA). If the Treaty
of Alliance has not been played, and a D3 roll exceeds Pa-

29

triot Resources or the French were unable to execute French
Agent Mobilization (8.6.2), execute Roderigue Hortalez et Cie
(3.5.2) by spending up to 1D3 French Resources to increase
Patriot Resources.
Then execute a Préparer la Guerre Special Activity.
Préparer la Guerre (Before Treaty Of Alliance). Move one
Blockade marker from Unavailable to the West Indies. If no
Blockade markers are Unavailable, instead move up to three
French Regulars from Unavailable to Available. If neither
of these is possible, Non-player French executes no Special
Activity.
8.6.2 French Agent Mobilization (Before Treaty Of Alliance). If the Treaty of Alliance has not been played and
the French did not execute Roderigue Hortalez et Cie, execute
French Agent Mobilization (3.5.1) by placing two Militia or, if
that is not possible, one Continental, in one of Quebec, New
York Colony, New Hampshire or Massachusetts, first to add
most Rebellion Control, then where there are most Patriot
units already.
Then execute a Préparer la Guerre Special Activity (8.6.1).
IF NONE: If no French Agent Mobilization was possible,
instead execute Roderigue Hortalez et cie (8.6.1).
8.6.3 Roderigue Hortalez Et Cie (After Treaty Of Alliance). If the Treaty of Alliance has been played and
the French were unable to execute a Muster (8.6.4), execute
Roderigue Hortalez et Cie by spending up to 1D3 French
Resources to add Patriot Resources.
If any Resources were transferred to the Patriots, execute a
Special Activity per the instructions below: Skirmish, or if that
is not possible, Préparer la Guerre, or if that is not possible
either, Naval Pressure. If none of these are possible, execute no
Special Activity.
SKIRMISH: Skirmish in the West Indies if possible, otherwise
in one space with both French and British that is not selected
for Battle or Muster. In the selected space, remove a British
Fort if possible, otherwise as many British cubes as possible.
PRÉPARER LA GUERRE (after Treaty of Alliance): If 1D6
rolls equal to or less than the number of Unavailable French
Regulars+Blockades, move one Blockade marker from Unavailable to the West Indies, or if that is not possible, move up to
three French Regulars from Unavailable to Available. If no
Blockades or French Regulars were moved from Unavailable
but French Resources = 0, add +2 French Resources.
NAVAL PRESSURE: Add one Blockade, first to a City selected
for Battle, then the City with most Support.
8.6.4 French Muster. If the Treaty of Alliance has been played
and a D6 roll is less than the number of Available French
Regulars, the French Muster (3.5.3) as follows:
•	 If fewer than four French Regulars are Available and WI
does not have Rebellion Control, place as many Regulars as
possible in WI.
•	 Otherwise, place as many Regulars as possible in a City
or Colony with Rebellion Control, first a space with
Continentals, then elsewhere.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

30

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

Then execute Skirmish (8.6.3), or if that is not possible Préparer
la Guerre (8.6.1), or if that is not possible either Naval Pressure
(8.6.3). If none of these are possible, execute no Special Activity.
IF NONE: If the Muster instructions cannot be executed,
instead execute Roderigue Hortalez et cie (8.6.3).
8.6.5 French March. If the Treaty of Alliance card has been
played, the French did not select Muster or Roderigue Hortalez
et cie, and Rebellion cubes + Leaders do not outnumber British
pieces in a space with both, the French March (3.5.4) as follows:
•	 While executing the bullets below, lose no Rebellion Control.
•	 Within that restriction, March with as many French Regulars
and Continentals as possible to add Rebellion Control, first
in Cities, then Colonies, within each first to spaces with most
British pieces.
•	 Then March any French Regulars that are not in or adjacent
to a space with British pieces towards the nearest British.
•	 If neither of the above are possible, March one French Regular
to a space with both Patriots and British pieces.
Then execute a Special Activity: Skirmish (8.6.3), or if that is
not possible Préparer la Guerre (8.6.3), or if that is not possible either Naval Pressure (8.6.3). If none of these are possible,
execute no Special Activity.
IF NONE: If no March moves are possible, the French Muster
(8.6.4).
8.6.6 French Battle. If the Treaty of Alliance has been played
and the French did not select Muster, March or Roderigue
Hortalez et cie, and Rebellion cubes plus Leader outnumber
British pieces in at least one space with both, the French Battle
(3.5.5) as follows:
•	 Select all spaces with both French and British pieces where
the Rebellion Force Level (including Continentals if possible)
plus Battle Modifiers exceeds the Royalist Force Level plus
Battle Modifiers. Within that, select the space with highest
Population first. If there are no such spaces, abort the Battle
Command and instead execute a March (8.6.5).
•	 Then execute a Special Activity: Naval Pressure (8.6.3), or if
that is not possible Skirmish (8.6.3) in a space not selected
for Battle, or if that is not possible either Préparer la Guerre
(8.6.3). If none of these are possible, execute no Special
Activity.

	

Note: The order in which the Special Activities are attempted is different for Battle than for the other French
Commands.

•	 Then resolve Battle in all selected spaces.
For each space where the Rebellion side Wins the Day (3.6.8),
the Patriots execute a free Rally Command (8.5.2) in one
space. For each City where the Rebellion side Wins the Day,
the French may move any Blockades from that City to another
City with more Support.
8.6.7 French Supply. The French pay one Resource for each
space where moving French Regulars would change Control.
Within each of these, pay first where the British would other-

wise be able to Reward Loyalty, then with highest Population.
In all other spaces where Supply is needed, move French pieces
to the nearest Patriot Fort (or if none, to Available).
8.6.8 West Indies Battle. If any French Regulars remain in
the West Indies after the Supply Phase Battle (6.2.2), pay one
Resource to keep them there if possible, otherwise return them
to Available.
8.6.9 French Redeployment. Redeploy the French Leader
(6.5.2) to a space with both French Regulars and Continentals
if possible, within that to the space with most French Regulars.
Remove a Blockade from the City with least Support; remaining
Blockades are moved to Cities with most Support.
8.6.10 Loyalist Desertion. Remove a Tory so as to change
Control of the most Population possible, then to remove the
last Tory in the space with most Population that is not already
at Active Support, then elsewhere.
8.6.11 French Brilliant Stroke. Non-player French will
use their Brilliant Stroke card if the Treaty of Alliance
Event has been played, the French Leader is in a space with four
or more French Regulars, and any player Faction is 1st Eligible
or the British play their Brilliant Stroke card.

8.7 Non-Player Indian Actions

When Non-player Indians are 1st or 2nd Eligible, they will
ignore the Event if the Indian Faction Symbol is underlined
with a sword. Otherwise, if they are Eligible to play the Event,
check any relevant Event Instructions (8.3.1), and execute the
Event if at least one of the following conditions are met:
•	 Opposition exceeds Support, and the Event will shift
Opposition and/or Support in favor of the Royalist side
(including by reducing FNI, but not by free Battles).
•	 The Event places at least one Indian Village or grants a free
Gather. (If so, place the Village in a space that already has
War Parties if possible.)
•	 The Event removes a Patriot Fort.
•	 There are at least four Indian Villages on the map, the Event
is Effective (8.3.3), and a D6 rolls five or higher.

If the Indians do not play the Event, they execute a Command
and Special Activity.
8.7.1 Raid. If the Indians are to execute a Command and Support plus 1D6 does not exceed Opposition, Raid (3.4.4) up to
three spaces as follows:
•	 Raid Colonies at Opposition with or adjacent to Underground
War parties (or within two spaces of Dragging Canoe), first
where Plunder will be possible after the Raid movement,
then elsewhere, within each in the spaces with the highest
Population.
•	 While executing the following bullets, do not remove the last
War Party from any Village space.
•	 Move an Underground War Party into each Raid target that
doesn’t already have at least one, or where War Parties do not
outnumber Rebellion pieces.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

•	 If Resources fall to zero during the Raid Command, Plunder
(or if that is not possible, Trade) before completing the Raid
Command.
•	 If no Raid is possible, instead execute Gather (8.7.2).

If no Special Activity was used during the Raid, instead War
Path after the Raid, or if that is not possible, Trade.
PLUNDER: Execute Plunder (4.4.3) in a Raid space with
more War Parties than Rebellion pieces, within that in the
highest Population.
WAR PATH: If Indian Resources are 0, execute Trade instead
if possible. Otherwise War Path in one space, first to remove
a Patriot Fort, then to remove the most Rebellion pieces possible per 8.1.2, within that first in a province with at least one
Village then elsewhere.
TRADE: If there is at least one Underground War Party at
a Village, Trade in the Village space with most Underground
War Parties, first requesting Resources from the British (if
Non-player Britiish, see 8.4.6 for results).
8.7.2 Gather. If the Indians did not select Raid, and Gather
would place two or more Villages or a D6 roll is less than the
number of War Parties Available, or if the Indians selected a
Raid or March Command but were unable to execute it, Gather
(3.4.1) in up to four spaces as follows:
•	 Place a Village in each space with room for one and at least
three War Parties (at least two War Parties if Cornplanter is
in the space), first in the space with the Indian Leader.
•	 Then place War Parties at Villages, first where there are enemy
pieces, then where there are no Underground War Parties,
then with the Indian Leader, then elsewhere.
•	 Then, if any Villages are Available, place War Parties in up
to two spaces with room for a Village, first where there are
exactly two War Parties already, then where there is exactly
one War Party, then elsewhere.
•	 Then, if no more War Parties are Available but fewer than four
Gather spaces have been selected, Gather in one additional
Village space to move in all adjacent Active War Parties
possible without adding any Rebellion Control, then flip all
Active War Parties in that space Underground.
After the Command, execute a War Path Special Activity (8.7.1)
or, if that is not possible, Trade. If neither is possible, do not
execute any Special Activity.
IF NONE: If no Gather is possible, the Indians instead March
(8.7.3), or if that is not possible either, Pass (2.3.3).
8.7.3 March. If the Indians did not select Raid or Gather and
no space has both a War Party and British Regulars, or if the
Indians selected a Scout or Gather Command but were unable
to execute it, the Indians March (3.4.2) into up to three spaces
as follows:
•	 When executing the following bullets, March first with
Underground then with Active War Parties, without either
moving the last War Party from any Village space, moving
the last 3 War Parties from a space where Gather could place
a Village, or adding any Rebellion Control.

31

•	 If at least one Village is Available, first March to get 3+ War
Parties in one additional Neutral or Passive space with room
for a Village.
•	 Then March to remove the most Rebellion Control possible,
first in spaces with no Active Support.
IF NONE: If no March is possible, the Indians instead Gather
(8.7.2), or if that is not possible either, Pass (2.3.3).
If any March moves were made, execute War Path (8.7.1), or
if that is not possible, Trade.
8.7.4 Scout. If the Indians did not select Raid or Gather, and at
least one space has both British Regulars and at least one War
Party, they Scout (3.4.3) into one space as follows:
•	 Move one War Party and the most Regulars and Tories
possible without losing British Control or adding Rebellion
Control in the origin space, first to a space with a Patriot Fort,
then to a Village space with enemy pieces, then to remove
the most Rebellion Control possible.
•	 Skirmish in the destination space to remove to remove a
Patriot Fort if possible, otherwise to remove the largest
number of enemy pieces possible.

If a Scout move was made, execute War Path (8.7.1), or if that
is not possible, Trade.
IF NONE: If no Scout move is possible, instead execute a
March (8.7.3).
8.7.5 Indian Supply. For each Colony with War Parties but no
Village, pay one Resource for Indian Supply first if moving the
War Parties would add Rebellion Control, then where Gather
could place a Village. If Indian Resources run out or neither
of the above conditions are met, move the War Parties in that
Colony to the nearest Village space.
8.7.6 Patriot Desertion. Remove the first Patriot Militia and
Continental first from spaces with Villages, then to remove
Rebellion Control, then to remove the last Patriot of that type
in a space, then elsewhere.
8.7.7 Indian Leader Redeployment. Redeploy Brant or Dragging Canoe to the space with most War Parties. Redeploy
Cornplanter to a Neutral or Passive Province with two or more
War Parties and room for a Village; if there is no such Province,
Redeploy him to the space with most War Parties.
8.7.8 Indian Brilliant Stroke. Non-player Indians will use
its Brilliant Stroke card if the Treaty of Alliance Event
has been played, the Indian Leader is in a space with three or
more War Parties, and any player Faction is 1st Eligible or a
Rebellion Faction plays a Brilliant Stroke card other than
Treaty of Alliance.
8.7.9 Defending in Battle. If the Indians are Defenders in a
Battle in a space with at least one Village, Activate all but 1
Underground War Party.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

32

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

8.8 One-Player Victory

A lone player plays either any one Faction against three Nonplayers, or British and Indian together, or Patriot and French
together (1.5), with the remaining Factions controlled by Nonplayers. A player playing two Factions together uses the lower
victory margin (7.3) of those two Factions.
To succeed, the player must avoid a win by any Non-player
through each Winter Quarters Round and have the highest
victory margin(s) after the final Round. The lone player never
wins during a Victory Phase (6.1, 7.2).

One-Player Difficulty Option

For greater challenge regardless of scenario or Period
Events Option (2.1) selected, beginning with the second
Winter Quarters Round, the player also must avoid having
a lower victory margin with any player Faction than any
Non-player Faction during each Victory Phase.
Non-Player Victory: If the player fails to avoid such an outcome, the Non-player with the highest victory margin (ties to
French then Indian then Patriot) wins the War of Independence:
•	 If French: Vive la France! Although France’s treasury is
almost empty, the successful French intervention in America
has cost Britain even more dearly. France replaces Britain as
the leading power both in Europe and in the colonies …at
least until domestic unrest grows too strong.
•	 If Patriot: Freedom is ours! The United States of America
have won their independence and crushed their Indian
neighbors. In coming years, they will sweep across the width
of the entire continent and eventually even replace the British
as the leading power of the world—but that time is still far
in the future.
•	 If Indian: Proclamation Line confirmed! With the colonies
brought under firm control by the combined efforts of British
and Indians, King George and his Parliament guarantees the
rights of the native nations of America in the territories west
of the Proclamation Line of 1763. While skirmishes and
raids will continue, the frontier will remain stationary in the
Appalachians for several decades before population pressure
starts to force it westward again.
•	 If British: John Bull triumphant! With both the French and
the Patriots thoroughly defeated, Britain is indeed Great and
takes its rightful place as the leading power in the world. Its
Indian allies are soon forgotten and the colonists will press
westward once more—but under the Union Jack, not the
Star-Spangled Banner.

Player Draw or Victory: If the player does survive to the final
Round, subtract the highest Non-player victory margin from
the lowest player victory margin to gauge the outcome. A difference of 5 or less is a stalemate; six or more a victory for the
player’s Faction(s):
•	 1 to 5: The struggle continues! Although all sides are
economically exhausted, none are willing to surrender. The
war in the Americas will continue until one of the European
powers becomes embroiled in a war closer to home and is
forced to withdraw its forces.
•	 6 or more, Player as Patriots and/or French: Secession
successful! The United States is recognized as an independent
state and will soon expand far to the west at the expense of
both native nations and other Europeans.
•	 6 or more, Player as British and/or Indians: Rebellion
defeated! The British Crown re-establishes firm control over
all its colonies. Expansion westward is slowed down by treaties
both with native nations and other European colonies.

EXAMPLE: A solo British/Indian player using the one-player
Difficulty Option avoids Non-player victory by keeping both British and Indian victory margins equal to or above both Patriot and
French margins upon each Victory Phase beyond the first Winter
Quarters card. At game end, Support is 27, Opposition is 24,
CBC is 10, CRC 14, and the Indians have seven Villages and the
Patriots five Forts on the map. The victory margins are:
	
British: 27–24+14–10 = 7
	
Indians: 27–24+(7–5–3) = 2
	
Patriots: 24–27+(5+3–7) = –2
	
French: 24–27+10–14 = –7
Since the player controls two Factions, he compares the lowest of his
two victory margins (the Indians’ 2) to the highest Rebellion victory margin (the Patriots’ –2). The difference is 4, so the result is a
stalemate: although the British have decisively defeated the French
on the world stage, the Patriots are only temporarily subdued and
will revolt again the next time the British are distracted by new
international conflicts.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

33

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

KEY TERMS INDEX
Accompanying: Command required for
Special Activity. (4.1.1)

Activate: Flip or leave Militia or War
Party Active. (1.4.3)

Active: Militia or War Party symbol end
up: vulnerable to Battle. Cubes, Forts
and Villages are always Active. (1.4.3)
Adjacent: Spaces next to each other for
movement or Events. (1.3.6)
Always Neutral: The four Indian Reserve spaces and the West Indies are
never at Support or Opposition. (1.6.2)

Attacker: The Faction initiating the
Battle. (3.6.2)
Available: Force pieces in holding boxes
that may be placed. (1.4.1)

Battle: Command that may remove Enemy pieces at the potential cost of losing
Friendly pieces. (3.6, 3.2.4, 3.3.3, 3.5.5)

Blockade: French Naval Intervention
impact on a City, reducing population
to zero in certain circumstances, and
limiting certain Commands while in
effect. (1.9)
Brilliant Stroke: Event card that a
Faction holds and may use to Trump the
active Event card. (2.3.8)

British: A Faction that represents
the forces and interests of the British
Empire who governed the Colonies.
(1.0, 1.5)
Campaign: Event card series leading
up to a Winter Quarters Round. (6.0)

Continental: Patriot Controlled Force
piece specializing in March, Battle and
Skirmish. (1.4)
Control: Possession of more pieces in
a Province or City by a Side than the
other Side, marked for British or Rebellion instantly (Indians alone cannot
Control). (1.7)

Cost: Resources given up for a Command. (3.1)

Cube: Regular, Continental or Tory
piece. (1.4)

Cumulative British Casualties (CBC):
Cumulative total British cubes and British Forts removed to Casualties. (1.6.4)
Cumulative Rebellion Casualties
(CRC): Cumulative total French Regulars, Continentals and Patriot Forts
removed to Casualties. (1.6.4)
Cylinder: Token to mark a Faction’s
Resources or Eligibility. (1.4, 2.2)
Defender: The Side opposite of the Attacker. (3.6.2)

Deployment: Initial set up of Forces.
(2.1, pages 36-39)
Desertion: Winter Quarters Round
phase when certain pieces may be removed to Available. (6.6)

Dual Use: Event with two alternative
effects. (5.2)

Eligible: Faction able to execute Event
or Command: per Faction order, 1st and
2nd Eligible. (2.3.1-.2)

Casualties: French Regulars, British
Regulars, Tories, Forts and Continentals eliminated due to Battle, Skirmish,
Partisans, War Path and certain events.
(1.6.4)

Enemy: Assets of the other Side from
the executing Faction. (1.5.2)

Colony: Provinces that represent the
thirteen British Colonies. (1.3.5)

Faction: Player or Non-Player role:
British, Patriots, French, Indians. (1.5)

Event: Card with Faction order and text
a Faction may execute. (2.3, 5.0)

City: Type of space: urban areas. (1.3.3)

Execute: Implement Event or conduct
Command or Special Activity. (2.3)

Command (Com): Core action Faction
performs with its Forces. (3.0)

Faction Order: Card symbols determining 1st and 2nd Eligible. (2.3.2)

Common Cause: British Command
allowing the British to use War Parties
as if they were Tories. (4.2.1)

Final: Last (as defined by the scenario)
Winter Quarters Round, game end.
(2.4.1, 7.3)
© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Flip: Switch Militia or War Party between Underground and Active. (1.4.3)

Force Level: A calculation of pieces for
one Side during a Battle that determines
how many dice are rolled to determine
Loss Level. (3.6.3)

Forces: Regulars, Tories, War Parties,
Continentals, Militia, Villages and Forts
(pieces). (1.4)
Fort: Mostly-immobile Force pieces
that affect Muster, Rally, Resources, and
Victory, among other functions. (1.4)

Free: Command or Special Activity via
Event that does not cost Resources from
any Faction involved or affect Eligibility.
(2.3.6, 3.1.2, 5.3)
French: A Faction that represents the
forces and interests of the Kingdom of
France. (1.0, 1.5)

French Agent Mobilization: French
Command to place certain Patriot
pieces. (3.5.1)
French Naval Intervention: Table that
tracks the level of French Naval Intervention (FNI) and Blockades. (1.9)
French Preparations: Available French
Regulars and Squadrons/Blockades plus
CBC. If greater than 15, the French may
play TOA. (2.3.9)

Friendly: Assets of the executing side.
(1.5.2)
Garrison: British Command to deploy
into Cities. (3.2.2)
Gather: Indian Command to place or
regroup pieces. (3.4.1)
In the space: Requirement for some
Leader Capabilities that the Leader
must be in the space benefiting from
the Capability. (1.10)

Indian Reserve: Provinces outside the
Colonies (Quebec, Northwest, Southwest, and Florida). (1.3.4)

Indians: A Faction that represents the
many Indian Tribes active during the
American Revolution. (1.0, 1.5)

34

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

Ineffective Events: Non-player avoidance of Events without effect. (8.1,
8.3.3)

Patriots: A Faction that represents the
forces and interests of the people in the
Colonies who are in rebellion. (1.0, 1.5)

Leader: Factional Leaders who may
impact Commands or other activities.
(1.10, 6.5.1)

Persuasion: Patriot Special Activity to
raise Resources. (4.3.1)

Ineligible: Faction skipped in Faction
order. (2.3.1-.2)

Leader Capability: Capability possessed
by each Leader potentially impacting
play. (1.10)

Level: Support/Opposition status of a
space. (1.6.1)	

Limited Command (Lim Com): A player Command in just one (destination)
space, with no Special Activity. (2.3.5)
Loser: The Side in a Battle opposite the
Winner. (3.6.8)

Loss Level: Total of dice rolled for
Battle and Modifiers included for the
Enemy Side. (3.6.4)

March: Command to move units and
flip Militia or War Parties to Active.
(3.2.3)
Militia: Patriot-led Force pieces. (1.4)

Modifiers: Adjustments to pieces removed in a Battle Command. (3.6.4,
3.6.6)
Muster: British and French Command
to place or regroup pieces. (3.2.1, 3.5.3)

Naval Pressure: British and French Special Activity to Change French Naval
Intervention (FNI) level. (4.2.3, 4.5.3)

Neutral: Space not in Support nor Opposition. (1.6.1)

Non-Player: Faction controlled by the
game. (1.5, 8.0)

Opposition: Status of space’s population
against the British. (1.6)
Overflow: Boxes and markers to help
manage cases of overcrowding. (1.3.8)

Partisans: Patriot Special Activity that
removes Enemy pieces. (4.3.2)
Pass: Decline to execute an Event or
Command when Eligible. (2.3.3)

Passive: City or Province in reserved
Support or Opposition. (1.6.1)

Pawn: Token to designate spaces selected for Command (black) or Special
Activity (gray). (3.1.1)

Phase: Segment of a Winter Quarters
Round. (6.0)

Piece: Regulars, Tories, War Parties,
Continentals, Militia, Villages and
Forts (not a marker like Leaders or
Blockades). (1.4)
Place: Move a piece from Available to
map. (1.4.1)
Plunder: Indian Special Activity to take
Resources from the Patriots following a
Raid Command. (4.4.3)

Population (Pop): Representation of the
populace of a Province or City, 50,000
to 100,000 people per point. (1.3.2-.3)

Préparer la Guerre: A French Special
Activity allowing the French to move
pieces from Unavailable to Available.
(4.5.1)
Priorities: Rules guiding Non-player
Factions. (8.0)

Propaganda: Marker left after RabbleRousing Command in City or Province.
(3.3.4)
Province: Type of space representing
rural areas. (1.3.2)

Rabble-Rousing: Command that places
Propaganda marker in a City or Colony
while shifting it toward Active Opposition. (3.3.4, 6.4.1)
Raid: Indian Command to reduce Opposition. (3.4.4)

Rally: Patriot Command to place or
regroup pieces. (3.3.1)
Rebellion: Patriots and French Factions. (1.5)
Redeployment: W inter Q uar ters
Round phase in which British moves
cubes. (6.5)

Regular: British and French Force
pieces specializing in March, Battle and
© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Skirmish. NOTE: Continentals are not
Regulars. (1.4)

Release Date: The Winter Quarters
Round during which certain British
units are moved from Unavailable to
Available per Scenario instructions.
(6.5.3)
Remove: Take from map (Forces to
Available). (1.4.1)

Replace: Exchange pieces between
Available and map. (1.4.1)
Reset: Winter Quarters Round phase
to ready for next card. (6.7)

Resources: Factions’ wherewithal for
Commands and other actions. (1.8)
Reward Loyalty: British action to increase Support. (3.2.1, 6.4.1)

Roderigue Hortalez et Cie: French
Command to provide Resources to the
Patriots. (3.5.2)

Royalist: British and Indians Factions.
(1.5)
Scout: Indian Command allowing the
Indians to move British units with Indian War Parties. (3.4.3)

Select: Choose an action’s locations or
targets. (3.1, 3.1.1, 4.1, 5.1)

Shaded: Second text choice of Dual-Use
Event, often pro-Rebellion. (5.2)
Shift: Change a space’s Support/Opposition. (1.6.1)
Side: Either Rebellion (Patriots and
French) or Royalists (British and Indians). (1.5)

Skirmish: A Special Activity to eliminate Enemy pieces. (4.2.2, 4.3.3, 4.5.2)
Space: Map area that holds pieces in
play: Province or City. (1.3.1)

Special Activities: Actions accompanying Commands; most are cost-free and
unique to a Faction. (4.0)

Squadron: Back side of the Blockade
counter; used when counter is placed in
the West Indies. (1.9)
Stacking: Limits on pieces that can occupy a space. (1.4.2)

Support: Status of space’s population
favoring the British. (1.6)

35

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

Target: Enemy Side, Faction or piece
that is the object of a Command, Special
Activity, or Event. (3.1, 4.1)

TOA: Abbreviation for Treaty of Alliance. (2.3.9)
Tory: British-led force pieces representing local forces Loyal to the King. (1.4)

Total Opposition: Passive Opposition
Population plus twice Active Opposition
Population. (1.6.3)
Total Support: Passive Support Population plus twice Active Support Population. (1.6.3)
Trade: Indian Special Activity to provide Resources. (4.4.1)

Treaty of Alliance (TOA): The card
played by the French to enter the war. It
is treated as a Brilliant Stroke card
and can be played under certain conditions. (2.3.9)
Trumping: Trumping is the act of
playing a Faction’s Brilliant Stroke

card canceling a just played Brilliant
Stroke card. (2.3.8)

Unavailable: Space for certain British
and French units before the British
move theirs according to the Release
Date schedule or the French move theirs
to Available with Préparer la Guerre.
(1.3.9, 1.4.1, 4.5.1)

Uncontrolled: A City or Province with
neither British nor Rebellion Control.
(1.7)
Underground: Militia or War Party,
symbol end down: capable of Raid or
Rabble-Rousing for example. (1.4.3)
Units: Regulars, Tories, War Parties,
Continentals and Militia but not Forts
or Villages. (1.4)
Unshaded: First text choice of Dual-Use
Event, often pro-Royalist. (5.2)

Victory Margin: Calculation, unique
to a Faction, of closeness to its Victory
condition. (7.1)

Village: Mostly-immobile Indian Force
pieces that affect Gather, Resources, and
Victory, among other functions. (1.4)

War Party: Indian-led force pieces. (1.4)
War Path: Indian Special Activity that
removes Enemy pieces. (4.4.2)
West Indies: A holding box that is not
in play until after Treaty of Alliance
(TOA) is played. (1.3.7)

Win the Day: A shift in Support or
Opposition for the winning Side in a
Battle. (3.6.8)

Winner (Battle): The Side in a Battle
losing fewest pieces, unless one Side
eliminated then surviving Side is the
winner. Defender is the winner if equal.
None if both Sides eliminated. (3.6.8)
Winter Quarters: Cards triggering
stop of play and Rounds of the same
name that include victory checks, Resource acquisition, and several other
periodic functions. (2.4, 6.0)

AVAILABLE FORCES (1.4.1)
	
Regulars	
Tories	
War Parties	
Continentals	
Militia	
Forts	
Villages	
Squadrons/Blockades	
	
Leaders	
	

(Total, before set up)

BRITISH	INDIANS	PATRIOTS	FRENCH
25			15
25			
	15		
		20	
		15	
6		6	
	12		
			3
Gage	
Brant	
Washington	Rochambeau
Howe	Cornplanter		
Lauzun
Clinton	
Dragging Canoe

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

36

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

S E T- U P ( 2 . 1 )
General
Choose a Scenario and any Non-player (1.5, 8.0), Winter is
Coming (2.3.7), or Period Events options desired. Prepare the
deck per the instructions below and per the Scenario. Give each
player a Faction foldout, and assign players their Factions (1.5
or see 8.0 Non-Player option).

	2-Player: British and Indians (Royalists) versus Patriots and
French (Rebellion).
	3-Player: British and Indians (Royalists) versus Patriots
versus French or, Patriots and French (Rebellion) versus
British versus Indians.
	4-Player: A Faction each: British, Indians, Patriots and
French.
Play Note: In the 1775 and 1776 Scenarios, the French Faction plays differently than any other COIN series Faction – if
any player is not prepared to build up off the map, finance
and impact events for one or two Campaigns, they should not
play the French or should choose the 1778 Scenario.
Place each player’s Available/Unavailable Forces in the appropriate holding boxes (1.4.1) and all markers in a pile or receptacle within easy reach. Keep the remaining aid sheets at hand.
Set up the game board per the Scenario, placing forces and
markers onto the board as listed.

Deck Preparation
Separate out the eight Winter Quarters cards, the five Brilliant Stroke cards (one for each Faction plus the Treaty of
Alliance card for the French), and shuffle the other 96 Event
cards. Place or remove Winter Quarters cards as instructed.
Unless instructed otherwise by the Scenario instructions, pass
the five Brilliant Stroke cards to the relevant player.
•	 Shuffle and randomly deal 10 Event cards (by Period, if
desired) into equal piles as specified in the Scenario. Shuffle
one Winter Quarters card into the bottom 4 cards of each
pile and put those five cards on the bottom of the pile. Stack
one pile onto the other to form a face-down draw deck in
easy view of all players. The 1775 deck will be the first deck
in the 1775 Scenario, the 1776 deck will be the first deck in
the 1776 Scenario and the 1778 deck will be the first deck
in the 1778 Scenario.
•	 Set aside the remaining Event cards. They will not be used
and may not be inspected.

Period Events Option
If desired, for events more akin to the historical Periods
covered, select Event cards by Scenario as follows:

Long: 1775-1780
A People Numerous and Armed. Deal event cards into two 10card piles only from those marked “’79-’80”, then two 10-card
piles only from those marked “’77-’78”, and then two 10-card
piles only from those marked “’75-’76”. Randomly select one
Winter Quarters card for each stack and shuffle it into the
bottom four cards of each pile and place those five cards on
the bottom of the pile. Prepare each stack individually then
stack the six of them, latest dates on bottom, and finally the
first ’75-’76 stack on top.
Medium: 1776-1779
British Return to New York. Deal event cards into one 10card pile only from those marked “’79-’80”, then two 10-card
piles only from those marked “’77-’78”, and then one 10-card
pile only from those marked “’75-’76”. Randomly select one
Winter Quarters card for each stack and shuffle it into the
bottom four cards of each pile and place those five cards on
the bottom of the pile. Prepare each stack individually then
stack the four of them, latest dates on bottom, and finally
the first ’75-’76 stack on top.
Short: 1778-1780
The Southern Campaign. Deal event cards into two 10-card
piles only from those marked “’79-’80”, then one 10-card
pile only from those marked “’77-’78”. Randomly select one
Winter Quarters card and shuffle it into the bottom four
cards of each pile and put those five cards on the bottom of
the pile. Prepare each stack individually then stack the three
of them, latest dates on bottom, and finally the first ’77-’78
stack on top.
Note: There are 32 “’79-’80” cards, 32 “’77-’78” cards, and 32
“’75-’76” cards.

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

37

SCENARIOS (2.1)
A People Numerous and Armed
1775 to 1780; Long Duration
Deck Preparation: The Treaty of Alliance Brilliant
Stroke card (#109) has not been played and is available
to the French. The remaining Brilliant Stroke cards are
distributed.
Prepare and stack the 1775, 1776, 1777, 1778, 1779 and 1780
Campaigns. (Refer to page 36 for deck preparation.)
Resources: British 6, Patriots 3, French 5, Indians 0
Support: 4
Opposition: 4
Cumulative British Casualties: 0
Cumulative Rebellion Casualties: 0
French Preparations: 0
FNI: 0

Available:
	British: 7 Regulars, 7 Tories, 3 Forts
	Patriots: 19 Continentals, 11 Militia, 5 Forts
	French: Rochambeau
	Indians: 9 War Parties, 12 Villages
Unavailable:
	British: 12 Regulars, 12 Tories
	French: 15 Regulars, 3 Squadrons/Blockades
British Release Date Schedule:
First Winter Quarters Round (After 1775)
•	 6 Regulars, 6 Tories
Second Winter Quarters Round (After 1776)
•	 6 Regulars, 6 Tories
Quebec City: British Control, Passive Support

British: 1 Regular, 1 Tory
Boston: British Control, Passive Support
	British: 3 Regulars, 1 Fort, Gage
New York City: British Control, Passive Support
	British: 1 Tory
Philadelphia: Rebellion Control
	Patriots: 1 Militia
Quebec: British Control
	British: 2 Tories, 1 Fort
	Indians: 1 War Party
Northwest:
	Indians: 2 War Parties, Brant
Southwest:
	Indians: 1 War Party
Florida: British Control
	British: 1 Regular, 1 Fort
	Indians: 1 War Party
Massachusetts: Rebellion Control, Active Opposition
	 Patriots: 1 Continental, 1 Militia, 1 Fort, Washington
New York: British Control
	British: 1 Regular, 2 Tories
	Patriots: 1 Militia
	Indians: 1 War Party
Virginia: Rebellion Control
	 Patriots: 1 Militia

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

	

38

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

British Return to New York
1776 to 1779; Medium Duration
Deck Preparation: The Treaty of Alliance Brilliant
Stroke card (#109) has not been played and is available
to the French. The remaining Brilliant Stroke cards are
distributed.
Prepare and stack the 1776, 1777, 1778 and 1779 Campaigns.
(Refer to page 36 for deck preparation.)
Resources: British 5, Patriots 2, French 5, Indians 0
Support: 3
Opposition: 5
Cumulative British Casualties: 1
Cumulative Rebellion Casualties: 3
French Preparations: 9
FNI: 0
Available:
	British: 7 Regulars, 10 Tories, 3 Forts
	Patriots: 12 Continentals, 10 Militia, 4 Forts
	French: 6 Regulars, Rochambeau
	Indians: 7 War Parties, 10 Villages
Unavailable:
	British: 6 Regulars, 6 Tories
	French: 9 Regulars, 1 Squadron/Blockade

British Release Date Schedule:
First Winter Quarters Round (After 1776)
•	 6 Regulars, 6 Tories
Quebec City: British Control, Passive Support
	British: 1 Regular, 1 Tory
Boston: Passive Opposition
New York City: British Control, Passive Support
	 British: 6 Regulars, 1 Fort, Howe
	Patriots: 1 Continental

Patriots: 1 Militia
Charles Town: Rebellion Control
	Patriots: 2 Continentals, 1 Fort
Quebec: British Control
	 British: 1 Regular, 1 Tory, 1 Fort
	 Patriots: 1 Militia
	 Indians: 1 War Party, 1 Village
Northwest:
	 Indians: 1 War Party
Southwest:
	 Indians: 1 War Party, 1 Village

Florida: British Control
	 British: 1 Regular, 1 Fort
	 Indians: 2 War Parties
Massachusetts: Rebellion Control, Active Opposition
	 Patriots: 1 Continental, 1 Militia, 1 Fort
New York: British Control
	 British: 3 Regulars, 3 Tories
	Patriots: 3 Continentals, Washington
	 Indians: 2 War Parties, Brant
Virginia: British Control
	 British: 2 Tories
North Carolina: Rebellion Control
	 Patriots: 1 Continental, 1 Militia
	Indians: 1 War Party
South Carolina: British Control
	British: 2 Tories
Georgia: Rebellion Control
	 Patriots: 1 Militia
West Indies:
	French: 2 Squadrons

Philadelphia: Rebellion Control

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

	

39

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

The Southern Campaign
1778 to 1780; Short Duration

Deck Preparation:
The Treaty of Alliance card (#109) is considered played
and is not available to the French. The remaining Brilliant
Stroke cards are distributed.
Prepare and stack the 1778, 1779, and 1780 Campaigns. (Refer
to page 36 for deck preparation.)
Resources: British 6, Patriots 3, French 8, Indians 2
Support: 17
Opposition: 16
Cumulative British Casualties: 10
Cumulative Rebellion Casualties: 12
French Preparations: 28 French at War side (but not necessary
as the French have already played the Treaty of Alliance
card (#109)).
FNI: 0
Available:
	British: 7 Regulars, 8 Tories, 3 Forts
	Patriots: 11 Continentals, 1 Militia, 2 Forts
	French: 8 Regulars
	Indians: 8 War Parties, 6 Villages

Unavailable:
	British: none
	French: none
Quebec City: British Control, Active Support
	British: 2 Regulars, 2 Tories
Boston: Rebellion Control, Passive Opposition
	Patriots: 2 Continentals
New York City: British Control, Active Support
	 British: 5 Regulars, 3 Tories , 1 Fort, Clinton
Philadelphia: British Control, Active Support
	 British: 4 Regulars, 2 Tories
Norfolk: Rebellion Control
	 Patriots: 1 Militia
Charles Town: Rebellion Control, Active Opposition
	Patriots: 2 Militia, 1 Fort
Savannah: British Control, Passive Support
	British: 2 Tories
Quebec: British Control
	British: 2 Regulars, 2 Tories, 1 Fort
	 Indians: 1 War Party, 1 Village
Northwest:
	 Indians: 1 War Party, 1 Village, Cornplanter
Southwest:
	 Indians: 1 War Party, 1 Village

Florida: British Control
	 British: 1 Regular, 1 Fort
	 Indians: 1 War Party, 1 Village
New Hampshire: British Control, Active Support
	 British: 2 Tories
Massachusetts: Rebellion Control, Active Opposition
	Patriots: 1 Fort
Connecticut-RI: Rebellion Control, Active Opposition
	British: 2 Tories
	 Patriots: 1 Fort
	 French: 4 Regulars, Rochambeau
New York: British Control, Active Support
	 British: 4 Regulars, 2 Tories
	Patriots: 1 Militia
	Indians: 1 War Party, 1 Village
New Jersey: Rebellion Control, Passive Opposition
	 Patriots: 2 Continentals, 4 Militia
Pennsylvania: Rebellion Control, Passive Opposition
	 Patriots: 5 Continentals, 2 Militia, 1 Fort, Washington
	 Indians: 1 War Party
Maryland-Delaware: Passive Support
North Carolina: Rebellion Control, Passive Opposition
	 Patriots: 2 Militia
South Carolina:
	Patriot: 2 Militia
	 Indians: 1 War Party, 1 Village
West Indies: Rebellion Control
	 French: 3 Regulars, 3 Squadrons

Optional Sprint Scenario

Set up as the Southern Campaign Scenario with the following exceptions:
Prepare the deck for two Campaigns only.
Deck Preparation:
Shuffle 20 Event cards and stack in two piles of 10 Events
and one Winter Quarters card each. (Period recommended
but not required: ten ‘77-‘78 cards (First Campaign) and ten
‘79-‘80 cards (Second Campaign).) In each stack, shuffle the
Winter Quarters card into the bottom four cards.Stack
the Campaigns.
All Brilliant Stroke cards are removed from play.
Ignore the Victory Check Phase (6.1) during each Winter
Quarters Round. The game ends at the end of the Support
Phase of the second Winter Quarters Round (6.4.3, 7.3).

© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

40

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play

Spaces List

Indian
Reserve

Colony

City

Type	Name	
Pop
Quebec City	
1
Boston	1
New York City	
2
Philadelphia	1
Norfolk	1
Charles Town	
1
Savannah	1
Cities Total Population:	
8
New Hampshire (NH)	
1
Massachusetts (MA)	
2
Connecticut-Rhode Island (CT)	
2
New York (NY )	
2
New Jersey (NJ)	
1
Pennsylvania (PA)	
2
Maryland-Delaware (MD)	
2
Virginia (VA)	
2
North Carolina (NC)	
2
South Carolina (SC)	
2
Georgia (GA)	
1
Colonies Total Population:	
19
Quebec (QC)	
0
Northwest (NW )	
0
Southwest (SW )	
0
Florida (FL)	
0

Force Pool

Type	

British	 Indians	Patriots	French

Regulars	

25			15

Tories	25
War Parties		

15

Continentals			 20
Militia			15
Forts	

6		6

Villages		12

Squadrons/
3
Blockades				

Leaders	31	32	13	24
Notes:
1
	 Gage, Howe, Clinton
2
	 Brant, Cornplanter, Dragging Canoe
3
	Washington
4
	 Rochambeau, Lauzun

Leader
Washington

Leader Capabilities

No further changes

Rochambeau
No changes
until TOA

Lauzun

French
French

No further changes

Gage

British

Howe

British

Clinton

British

Brant

Indians

Cornplanter

Indians

No further changes

Dragging Canoe Indians

No further changes

GMT Games, LLC
P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC

110

Faction
Capability
Patriots Double Rebellion Win the
Day shift in the space. –1 to
Defender Loss Level when
Rebellion Defending in the
space

French March and Battle with
Patriot Command at no cost.
Additional +1 to Defender
Loss Level when French
Attacking in the space.

1st shift: Reward Loyalty is
free in the space.
Before executing a British
SA first lower FNI 1 level.

Skirmish removes 1 additional
Militia in the space.

War Path removes 1
additional Militia in the space.
Gather builds Villages for 1
War Party in the space.

Raid may move 1 extra space
if originated in the space.

