G A M E RU L E S

Credits:
Game Design: Vital Lacerda
Illustrations: Ian O´Toole
Head of development: Paul Incao
Lead developers: Julián Pombo and Nils Urdahl
Graphic Design & 3D Illustrations: Ian O’Toole
Rulebook & 3D Illustrations: Vital Lacerda
English Rules Editing: Nathan Morse
Official Rules Video: Paul Grogan, Gaming Rules!
Proofreading: Ori Avtalion, Paul Grogan
Project Managers: Rick Soued & Alex Soued

Many thanks to all players who playtested Lisboa for the last 4 years and sent so many suggestions.
Main playtesters:
Emanuel Diniz, Nuno Fonseca, Rafael Pires, Thomas Brygmann
The Author wishes to warmly thank for playtesting and suggestions:
Alexandre Bezerra, André Almeida, Brandon Kempf, Brian Frahm, Brian Tri, Carlos Paiva, Carolina Valença, Catarina Sarmento, Celine Gaudin, César Mendes, Clayton Ross,
Chris Arnold, Chris Weiss, Cristina Antunes, Christophe Gaudin, Christopher Incao, David da Silva, Dave Moss, Derek Davis, Duarte Conceição, Eduardo Mendieta, Eisen
Montalvo, Elsa Romão, Gary Perrin, Gonçalo Moura, Hugo Cabrita, Hugo Elias, Ian O’Toole, Jake Blomquist, Jason Grantz, João Monteiro, João Madeira, Jorge Blázquez, Jorge
Deinos, Jorge Graça, Joze Reverente, Lars Helmersson, Luís Cóias, Luís Severino, Ori Avtalion, Patrick Morrison, Paulo Renato, Paulo Terça, Pedro Almeida, Pedro Branco, Pedro
Freitas, Pedro Sampaio, Pedro Sequeira, Pete King, Piero Cabral, Mal King, Malte Frieg, Manny Rodriguez, Matthew Dennison, Matthew James Goodwin, Mitch Chiappalone,
Nicola Bocchetta, Nikolas Co, Nicholas Hjelmberg, Rafael Duarte, Rafael Maia, Rafael Theunis, Ralph Anderson, Réjean Ducharme, Ricardo Almeida, Ricardo Gama, Ricardo
Moita, Rob Arntz, Roel Vaneerdeweg, Rodrigo Levin, Ruben Rodrigues, Sandra Sarmento, Sandrina Fernandes, Sara Rodrigues, Sébastien Charbonneau, Shay Rickman, Sofia
Passinhas, Stephen Roberts, Steve Raab, Tiago Ribeiro, The Dice Men Cometh (Mark, Garth & Leon), Vasco Almeida, Vitor Pires, Warren Adams.
A very special thanks to Julián Pombo and Nils Urdahl for the infinite playtesting hours on Tabletopia, incredible ideas, great development and friendship. To Ian O’Toole for
the amazing art and graphic ideas, to Nathan Morse, for all the support, ideas, and many working hours on the rulebook, Ori for his eagle eye on catching issues in the rules,
all of the BGG community for their suggestions and support, and finaly to Paul Incao, who keeps following me on this adventure, with many great ideas, and for being available
at every hour for developing. To Alex, Rick Soued, and the entire EGG team for believing in this game. Without all of these people this game would not have been possible.
All my love to my beautiful daughters Catarina and Inês and to my muse and greatest friend, my wife Sandra, for their patience, support, inspiration, and many hours of discussion on this game.

A ga m e b y Vi t a l L a c e r d a / 1 _ 4 P l ay e rs / 3 0 m i n p e r p l ay e r / A ge s 1 4 +
On November 1st, 1755, on All Saints’ Day, Lisboa suffered an earthquake
of an estimated magnitude of 8.5–9.0, followed by a tsunami, and 3 days of
fires. The city was almost completely destroyed.
The Marquis of Pombal, Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo, was the prime
minister at the time, and the king put him in charge of the reconstruction of
Lisboa.
The king and the prime minister immediately launched efforts to rebuild
the city. On December 4th, 1755, little more than a month after the
catastrophe, the chief engineer of the realm, Manuel da Maia, presented his
plans to rebuild Lisboa. Maia presented five options, including abandoning
Lisboa altogether, rebuilding with recycled ruins, widening the streets, and
even building a completely new city. The chosen plan boldly proposed razing
the entire Baixa quarter and “laying out new streets without restraint”.

Eugénio dos Santos and Carlos Mardel were the architects in charge of the
rebuilding.
In less than a year, the city was cleared of debris. Because the king wanted to
have a new and perfectly ordered city, he commissioned the construction of
big squares, straight, large avenues, and widened streets, with related types
of businesses as if each street had its own motto: A Baixa de Lisboa.
A game of Lisboa is set over a span of 22 years. You play the roles of
influential nobles who survived the earthquake, tsunami, and fires, and
who will help in the reconstruction and economic development of the new
city to receive graces from the king and the marquis. You will work with
the architects to build Lisboa anew in order to gain Influence, and the most
important thing of all: Wigs.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Components 			

Rubble Sets for Reconstruction 9

4

Your Portfolio 			

9

Action 2: Trade with Nobles 	 12
The State Actions 		

12

The Noble Actions 		
Build a Store 		

17

17

Setup 				

5

Playing a card into your Portfolio 9

Recruit State Officials 	

12

Choosing a Wooden House 	

18

Player board setup 		

5

Portfolio and warehouse size 	 9

Acquire a Plan 	

	

12

Board setup 			

6

Build a Ship 		

13

18

Card setup 				

7

Playing a Noble card into
your Portfolio 		
10

Earning Wigs
for Your New Store 	

Simulate the earthquake 	
Game Concept	

		

Gameplay 				

7
8
8

Your turn 				

8

Dock your Ships 		

8

Get 1 Gold 			
Take an Action 		

9

8

Playing a Treasury card into
your Portfolio 		
10

Produce goods 		

14

Meet the Cardinal 	

14

Cardinal movement 	

14

Church Scoring 	

15

Get a Royal Favor 	

15

Influence 				

10

Gaining Influence 		

10

Spending Influence 		

11

Spending Influence instead
of Réis 				

11

Follow a Visit 		

11

Spending Influence
to Visit a Noble 		

Action 1: Sell Goods 		

Action 3: Visit a Noble 	

16

16
16

Take a Decree 		

19

Open a Public Building 	

20

Hiring State Officials 	

21

Action 4: Sponsor an Event 	

21

Take a Political Card 		

21

End of Turn 				

22

End of Period 	

22

		

End of the Game 		

22

Endgame Scoring 		

23

COMPONENTS
5 Réis

10 Réis

Back
1 Real
Gameboard

Rulebook + Player aid book + Solo rules

4 player boards

68 Goods tokens: 17 Gold,
17 Cloths, 17 Books, 17 Tools

55 Real coins: 30 of 1 Real,
20 of 5 Réis, and 5 of 10 Réis

Green Architect side
Entrance

Back

Entrance

Blue Architect side

20 Plans — 4 of them are Starting
Plans with a blue back.

16 double-sided Public Buildings

22 City tiles

5 small City tiles

4 Scoring tiles

Backs
Back

King

Back

Marquis
Manuel
12 Royal Favor tiles from 3 Nobles

Tsunami

37 Clergy tiles and 1 Cardinal meeple

Big meeples
4 Courtier meeples in player colors

4

12 Ship cards in 4 colors

70 Decree cards

4 Price markers in 4 colors

8 Discs in 4 player colors

20 Rubble Set markers in player colors

32 wooden houses in player colors

1 Starting Player marker

Clergy Tile and Rubble bags

Cloth

Books

Earthquake
63 Rubble cubes in 3 colors

82 Political cards in 4 decks

Tools

Fire

1 Treasury marker

Back

Back

Gold

Smaller meeples
32 Official meeples in player colors

SETUP
Put 1 Royal Favor tile of each character, per
player, in the Rubble bag. Put all of the Clergy
tiles in the Clergy Tile bag.

Player Board Setup:
Each player chooses a color and takes the
following:
1.	 1 player board.
2.	 1 Player Aid book.
3.	 5 Rubble Set markers (cubes).
4.	 8 wooden houses.
5.	 8 Officials (meeples).

Game Art, the Portuguese Azulejo, and the Wigs
All the art Ian O’Toole created for Lisboa is based
on murals of glazed Portuguese tiles, as the art
form had evolved by the 17th Century. Even today,
you can find these murals not only in many palaces,
churches, and Noble houses, but also in middleclass homes. Mass production of these tiles began in
the 18th Century, partly due to increased demand
in Portugal, but also from large orders that started
coming in from the Portuguese colony, Brazil. After
the earthquake, they became trendy, and often
depicted historical situations, framed by decorative
patterns — all of this done predominantly in blue
and white.
The Portuguese name for these tiles is Azulejos
Portugueses. In this game, the gameboard, player
boards, and cards all give homage to this art, which
for many people epitomizes the look of Portugal.

A more ubiquitous trendy commodity from that time was
the wig. The following excerpt perfectly explains why
wigs were chosen as the “victory points” in this game:
“With wigs being the universal male consumer product
of the 1700s, and everyone from shopkeeper to king
wearing one, men were spoiled for choice. While a shop
boy might only be able to afford one wig, and thus
had to choose wisely and for durability, those of the
one percent of the population, the Nobleman and the
wealthy citizens, could afford to own dozens of wigs. If
they considered themselves to be a leader of fashion, were
eccentric, or merely had the money to indulge a whim,
they could purchase wigs that others could only dream of
owning (or not, as the case may be!).”
From ‘The Wig Business was Big Business in 18th Century‘
by Lucinda Brant

6.	 1 Good tile of each type (gold, books, cloth,
tools).
7.	 10 réis [HRA-ees] (sounds like “race”; please
note: singular form is “real” [hree-ALL] —
e.g. 1 real, 2 réis).

7
1

8.	 2 Clergy tiles from the Clergy Tile bag
at random. Look at them and keep one;
return the other to the bag.
9.	 1 random Royal Favor tile drawn from the bag.

6

8

3

10.	1 random Starting Plan (the ones
with the dark blue backs). Return the
remaining Starting Plans to the box.
(Each of the components above has a proper
place, face-up on your player board. See the
illustration to the right.)

And on the Gameboard (see next page)
•	 1 Courtier meeple, which goes in one of the
Royal Court spaces.

4
10

9
2

•	 Place 1 of your Officials in the office of the
Marquis, the middle character (does not
matter which space).

5

•	 T he player who visited
Lisboa most recently is the
starting player, and takes the
Starting Player marker. Play
goes clockwise from this
player.

Plaza

•	 1 Wigs marker, which goes on space 5 of the
Wigs score track.

In a 2-player game, place 1 Official from
an unused color in any space of each of the
three Nobles’ offices. They will remain there
all game and count as opponents’ meeples.

•	 1 Influence disc: Put the first player’s
Influence disc on space 4 of the Influence
Track; the second player’s goes on space 5;
third player, space 6; fourth player, space 7.

5

SETUP

(CONT.)

Board Setup:

F

Public Buildings
1.	 The Public Buildings are blue on one side,
green on the other. Flip all 16 Public
Buildings blue-side-up, then shuffle them.
Split the stack into two stacks of 8, and flip
one stack green-side-up. Place each stack
just off the board beside the plan space of
the same-color architect.

G

8

D
9

2.	 Move the top tile of each architect’s Public
Building stack into the architect’s plan
space. This way, players can always see both
the current and the next Public Building
available.

C

10

Noble’s offices

2
A

3

11

1

Plans
3.	 Separate the Plan tiles into two face-up
stacks, based on which architect is depicted:
green or blue. Sort each stack by the
number of officials depicted, such that the
fewest officials are on top, and the most
are on bottom. Place each stack on the
appropriate space.
3

Stores
4.	 Place the 4 Price markers in the spaces marked
with the goods’ colors on the market track.

B

5.	 Place one City tile on each space (yellow,
pink, brown, blue, small blue) on the board
to form the City Building display. Leave the
remaining tiles in stacks near the display.
6.	 Shuffle the 4 Scoring tiles depicting wigs,
and place a random one in each space at the
bottom of the downtown map.
7.	 In a 2-player game, cover row E with the
2-player overlay (see Variants and Add-ons
sheet).

Church
4

8.	 Draw 6 Clergy tiles from the Clergy Tile bag,
and place them face-up (wigs-side-down) on
the dark spaces of the Church track.
9.	 Place the Cardinal meeple on the space of
the Church track with the Influence symbol
(envelope).

6

9

Other Setup
10.	Dump the remaining Royal Favor tiles from
the Rubble bag, and stack the tiles for each
character on the space on that character’s
portrait.
11.	Place the big Treasury marker cube on
space 3 of the Treasury track.
12.	Place all the goods and all money next to
the gameboard to form the general supply
and the Royal Treasury.

Note: Goods and réis are not
limited by the components; simply
use a substitute if they run out.

ii

12

F.	 Shuffle the Decree deck and
place it face-down next to the
gameboard.
G.	Lay out the top 8 cards of the
Decree deck to form a face-up
display next to the gameboard.
In a 2-player game, any Decree cards
with this symbol on them must be
immediately returned to the box when they
come out, and replaced with a new card.

i

Simulate the Earthquake

5

The brown cubes represent destruction by the
earthquake, the red cubes represent destruction
from the 3 days of fires, and the blue cubes
represent the destruction from the tsunami.

ii
ii

Place all Rubble cubes in the Rubble bag.
i.	 Place a random Rubble cube from the bag in
each space at the bottom of the columns of
the Downtown map, and at the right end of
the rows (in a 2-player game, skip row E).

6
3

2
E

1

i
iii

12

4

ii.	 Place 2 random Rubble cubes in each Public
Building Site around the three edges of
Downtown (in a 2-player game, skip row E);
these represent neighboring sites.
iii.	 Place 6 random Rubble cubes in the
Rubble pile next to the Rubble values (in
a 2-player game, return the remaining
Rubble cubes to the box).

B

Card Setup
A.	 Separate the Political cards into
decks by color. Shuffle each deck
and set them aside for now.
B.	 Deal 5 cards to each player from
the blue deck (1755–1757) and
return the remaining cards to the box.
Experienced players may wish to draft
their starting hands. In this case, each
player keeps 2 cards and passes 3 to the
player on the left. Then, from the 3
cards you just received, keep 1 and pass
2 to the left. Finally, from the 2 cards
you just received, keep 1 and pass the
last 1 to the left.

C.	 Distribute all cards from the red deck (1758–
1762) face-down in the Event
display, separated by type (card
back) on their respective spaces;
this will make 4 different decks of 5
unique cards each. Then flip the top
card of each deck face-up.
D.	 There are 3 copies of each Ship card. With
4 players, include 3 of each Ship card; with
3 players, include only 2 of each; with 2
players, only 1 of each. Return any remaining
copies of the Ship cards to the box.
E.	 Stack the blue Ship cards atop the red Ship
cards and place the stack faceup in the shipyard. Set
the others aside for
now. They will be used
later in the game.

i

ii

iii

Gaiola Pombalina
Downtown buildings were built over the wrecks of the
old destroyed buildings. Rubble was one of the most
important construction materials in the rebuilding of
Lisboa. Masonry walls with an embedded braced timber
structure, known as the “Gaiola Pombalina”, were filled
with rubble to make the new buildings durable and antiseismic, while retaining the
flame resistance of brick.
To reflect this, collecting sets
of rubble will increase your
warehouse space and the size
of your Portfolio, and also
helps set the pace of the game.

7

Political Cards
There are 2 types of Political Cards:
Noble cards: Each Noble card depicts one of the
3 Nobles in the game, with an envelope at the top,
representing Influence, and a reward / penalty on an
arrow at the bottom.
Noble cards represent a political event in which you
engage with one of the Nobles. You can play this type
of card in the Royal Court to visit the Noble, or into
your Portfolio for the reward and for future Influence.

Influence

GAME CONCEPT
You will be working with the King, D. José I, with
Manuel da Maia, the royal builder, and the Marquis
de Pombal, the prime minister, to reconstruct a
new Lisboa, and develop its economy. You need to
build stores downtown to produce goods, and will
earn wigs once appropriate Public Buildings are
opened to drive traffic to your stores. In order to
open Public Buildings, you will need Plans from
one of the two architects, and enough state officials

GAMEPLAY
Overview

Noble Portrait

Event (flavor)

Reward or
Penalty

Treasury cards: Each Treasury card has 2 treasury
icons at the top. One with an arrow and another
with a real with a plus sign. It also has an icon of
an action/reward in the middle, and a money/sales
benefit at the bottom.
Treasury cards represent a subsidy from the Royal
Treasury to you. You can play this type of card in
the Royal Court for the action/reward, or you can
play it into your Portfolio to take a subsidy from
the Royal Treasury and gain a permanent money/
sales benefit.
Subsidy and
Treasury modifier
(down 1 step)

to staff the building. You will need Influence to
convince the nobles to help you complete these
tasks via Noble actions, but you could also trade
with them, offering goods in exchange for State
actions. You can also meet with the Cardinal to
acquire Clergy tiles, which give you permanent
powers. Last, but by no means the least, you
can persuade the Marquis to make decrees that favor
you, granting you more wigs at the end of the game.

A game of Lisboa is divided into 2 time periods,
each of which spans a variable number of rounds.
On your turn, you will play one of the five
Political cards in your hand to perform one of
the four available actions or to get 1 gold; then
you will take a new card into your hand from
the Political card display. Finally, the turn
passes to the player on your left.
When a player manages to complete 2 sets
(brown, red, blue) of rubble, or 3 decks of
Political cards are exhausted (whichever comes

first), the first time period ends at the end of
that player’s turn.
After the change of period is resolved, the
game continues until the end of the game is
triggered by a player having 4 complete sets of
rubble, or by 3 decks of Political cards being
exhausted again.
At the end of the round in which that
happens, players will take one more turn and
then the final scoring occurs.
The player with the most wigs wins the game.

YOUR TURN
On your turn, you will first Dock Your Ships, then either Get 1 Gold or Take an Action, then
Take a Political Card, and finally do some basic upkeep for your End of Turn.

Dock Your Ships
If you have any Ships in your
Portfolio that are “at sea” (i.e.
the cargo hold is full, and thus
the goods in the cargo hold are
flipped face-down so they are all packed up in
crates), return the goods from the cargo hold
to the general supply. Your Ships at sea have
returned from their voyage!

Action/Reward

Get 1 Gold
As an act of desperation, you can Get 1 Gold
instead of taking an action, by performing the
following steps:
1.	Discard a Political card from your hand.
2.	Take 1 gold from the general supply.
Note: Whenever a card is discarded, it
is removed from the game.

Example
Event (flavor)
Money / Sales
benefit
If the goods are face-down, the Ship is at sea.

8

Green decides to Get 1 Gold. He chooses any one
card from his hand, discards it, and takes a gold
from the general supply in
return. Then he takes one card
from the display and finishes
his turn.

Take an Action

Playing a Card into Your Portfolio

Play a card from your hand to take 1 of the 4
actions described below (you must be able to
perform the action in order to take it).

When you add a card to your Portfolio, you
tuck the arrow end of the card under your
player board. Any benefit or penalty depicted
on the portion of the card that goes under your
board must be resolved before it is hidden.

1

2

3

4

Resolve the
reward
Tuck the card
under the board

You play the card into your Portfolio in order
to take action 1 or 2; you play the card into
the Royal Court in order to take action 3 or 4.

Play into Your Portfolio
1.	 Any card to Sell Goods;
2.	 Any card to Trade with the Nobles;

Play into the Royal Court
3.	 A Noble card to Visit a Noble’s Office;
4.	 A Treasury card to Sponsor an Event.

Your Portfolio
Adding Political cards to your Portfolio grows your
Business and though it, the power and Influence you
have on the Crown.

Your player board has 3 wide “slots” for cards
at the top (docks), and 3 narrow slots at the
bottom (your office). These 6 slots are called
your Portfolio and each slot can hold only
1 card at a time. The top slots (docks) are
reserved for Nobles and Ships, both of which
give you cumulative Influence. The bottom slots
(your office) are for Treasury cards, which give
you money discounts or sales benefits.
Docks -> Noble and Ship cards

Portfolio and Warehouse Size
The number of goods of each type you are
allowed to have is equal to your Portfolio size
and limited by the number of Rubble sets you
have collected (see sidebar).
Your Warehouse can hold 2 goods of each kind.
Each Rubble set you collect lets it hold 1 more
good of each kind. (Excess goods are returned
to the general stock.)
Your Portfolio can have 2 cards +1 card for each
Rubble set you have collected (see sidebar).
If you want to play a card to your Portfolio
when it is already at its capacity, you must first
discard a card from your Portfolio.
If you discard a Ship to make room for a Noble,
discard the goods on the dock beneath the Ship.

Example

Note: The gray arrow, with icon(s) on it, at
the top or bottom of
the cards shows you
which end of the card
you will tuck under
your player board
when you add it to
your Portfolio.

Rubble Sets for Reconstruction,
or Gaiola Pombalina
By proportionate use of rubble from each of the three
disasters, you can build new buildings from a wooden
frame embedded in masonry, which is resistant to
earthquake, fire, and tsunami.
Building stores (page 17) or opening Public Buildings
(page 20) will reward you with rubble cubes.
Each set of 1 earthquake rubble, 1 fire rubble, and 1
tsunami rubble you complete immediately increases
your Portfolio size and warehouse space.

Start ≤ 2(

)

=+ 1(

)

When you complete a set, take the Rubble Set
marker from the +1 space above the set to indicate
that your Portfolio can hold 1 more card, and
you can store 1 more of each type of good. Move
the Rubble Set marker onto Marquis de Pombal’s
portrait on the gameboard. You will be able to
discard it during the Take a Decree action to take
another card. Decrees earn you wigs at the end of
the game.

Green already has 3 cards in his Portfolio and only
1 set of Rubble. He wants to play another card into
his Portfolio. He must first discard one of the cards
already there.
Your office -> Treasury cards

In the beginning of the game, you can only
have 2 cards in your Portfolio; both could be
in the top slots, both in the bottom slots, or you
could have one in the top and one in the bottom.

Note: If you don’t have a free space on
your board to place a Rubble cube you
take, just discard the cube. You can
never have more than 5 Rubble cubes of
one kind.

Designer’s Tip
After you play a card to your Portfolio, you must either Sell Goods or Trade with the Nobles, both of which
require at least one good. Make sure that after getting the reward at the bottom of the card, you will have at
least one good, or you cannot play the card into your Portfolio.

Example
After placing the rubble to complete the set, Green can
store 4 goods of each type, and can have 4 cards in his
Portfolio (2+1+1). He moves the Rubble Set marker
onto the Marquis’ portrait. Later, he Takes a Decree,
and opts to discard this marker to take a second Decree
card (see Take a decree, page 19).

9

Playing a Noble Card into
Your Portfolio _ Examples
Reward Example: Purple plays a Manuel da Maia
card into her Portfolio. She tucks the card into a top
slot of her player board, which covers a Gold icon, and
she is rewarded with a Gold good tile. This card also
provides her 3 Influence whenever she gains Influence.
She chooses to use her new Gold to Trade with the
Nobles (action 2).

Purple tucks the card into the top of her Portfolio and takes a
gold. From now on, she will gain 3 Influence each time she gains
Influence.
Penalty Example: When Orange plays this powerful
5-Influence Marquis card into his Portfolio, he has to
take one of his Officials from the Nobles, if he has any.
He takes one Official from any office/plaza to pay the
card’s penalty (if he had had no Officials in any offices/
plazas, he wouldn’t have had to take any at all!). He
chooses to Sell Goods to increase his money (action 1).

Playing a Noble Card
into Your Portfolio
Noble cards must be played in the top slots of
your Portfolio. To play a Noble card into your
Portfolio, perform the following steps:

Treasury cards must be played in the bottom
slots of your Portfolio. To play a Treasury card
into your Portfolio, perform the following steps:

1.	Receive the reward / pay the penalty
depicted at the bottom of the card. If the
icon has a
over it, it is a penalty, and
you must pay the depicted item instead of
receiving it. If you cannot pay the penalty,
you can still play the card. Cards with
penalties provide you more Influence than
the other cards from the same deck. (See
Political Card descriptions, page 7 of Player
Aid book.)

1.	Immediately receive a quantity of réis
from the Royal Treasury equal to the
Treasury value. This amount is indicated
to the right of the Treasury marker.

2.	Select an empty slot at the top of your
player board (it doesn’t matter which one),
or discard a card from one of the slots, then
tuck the card under your player board, such
that the reward/penalty icon on the bottom
portion of the card is covered.
3.	Then you must perform a Sell Goods action
(action 1) or a Trade with the Nobles
action (action 2).

Noble cards show the Influence the player may earn, and
Treasury cards show a permanent money/sales benefit.

The event leads to a penalty instead of a reward. Orange takes 1
Official from the King’s office to tuck the card into his Portfolio.

2.	Move the Treasury marker down 1
space, because you have taken money
from the Royal Treasury. The treasury
marker cannot go beyond the confines
of its track.
3.	Select an empty slot at the bottom of your
player board (it doesn’t matter which one),
or discard a card from one of the slots, then
tuck the card under your player board, such
that the treasury icons are covered.
4.	Then you must perform a Sell Goods action
(action 1) or a Trade with the Nobles
action (action 2).
Treasury cards also provide a money/sales
benefit at the bottom of the card. This benefit
remains active while the card is in your
Portfolio, and it is cumulative with other
Treasury cards you have in your Portfolio. (See
Political Card descriptions, page 7 of Player
Aid book.)

Before continuing with the rules of the game, you need to understand the concept of
Influence. Influence is required to take some very important actions, and has great
impact on many steps of the game.

Playing a Treasury card into
your Portfolio _ Example

INFLUENCE

The Treasury value is 3 réis. Green plays a Treasury
card into his Portfolio, then takes 3 réis from the Royal
Treasury, and moves the Treasury marker down one
space. The lower part of this card depicts a real, which
means that as long as this card is in his Portfolio, it is
worth 1 real whenever he spends money for any reason.
He then Trades with the Nobles (action 2).

One needs Influence in order to be accepted into the higher circles of the Crown. Influence is the
best way, and sometimes the only way, to gain access to the Nobles and their benefits.

Green receives 3 coins from the
treasury and ends up with a permanent
discount of 1 coin in his Portfolio. The
treasury is now at 2 réis.

10

Playing a Treasury Card
into Your Portfolio

Gaining Influence
When you gain Influence, you always earn
the total Influence depicted at the tops of the
Noble and Ship cards in your Portfolio (i.e. on
the cards in the top row). You indicate this by
moving your Influence marker rightward on
the Influence track.

Purple gained 2 Influence.

Important: Your Influence cannot
exceed 10, and any excess beyond that
goes to waste; however, each time
you increase your Influence, if your
Influence marker ends up on the Wig
icon (the 10 space of the Influence
track), you gain 1 wig — even if your
Influence was already 10 before the
opportunity to gain Influence. Similarly,
your Influence cannot go below 0; there
is no penalty for having 0 Influence.

Gaining Influence _ Example
Yellow receives a total of 5 Influence from her
Noble card and her Ship card. Yellow already had
7 Influence, and 7 + 5 = 12. So, Yellow only gains
3 Influence, but because her Influence marker ended
up on the Wig icon in the 10 space, she gains 1 wig.

Spending Influence

Ship Cards

There are only 2 ways of spending Influence in
the game:

There are 4 different Ship cards in the game.
Ship cards are identified by their hull size and
color.

1.	Visiting a Noble (see Spending Influence to
Visit a Noble, page 16).
2.	Choosing to spend Influence instead of réis
(see below).

Influence

Price modifier

Spending Influence instead of Réis

The 2 main ways of gaining Influence are as
follows:

If you need to spend réis, you may opt to
generate any portion of the money you need
by spending Influence. For each real you wish
to provide by spending Influence, move your
Influence marker leftward on the Influence
track until it reaches the next space depicting a
real. While your Influence is at 0, you cannot
generate any more réis this way.

1.	When you Build a Ship (see Build Ship,
page 13).

Treasury modifier

2.	When Church Scoring occurs (see Church
Scoring, page 15).
You can also gain Influence as a reward on a
card or building space or a clergy tile.

(up 1 step)

Orange just generated 3 réis by spending Influence.

ACTION 1: SELL GOODS
Only Portugal’s strong commerce with its colonies (especially Brazil) and Europe, made it possible
to rebuild a completely wrecked city in a modern and enlightened way, and in such a short time.

When you take the Sell Goods action, you can
sell one or more goods. Perform the following
steps for each good you sell:
1.	Choose a docked Ship (a Ship card in any
player’s Portfolio that still has space for
goods).
2.	Move a Good (Gold, Books, Cloth, or Tools)
token from your warehouses onto an empty
dock space below the Ship.
3.	Receive money from the Royal Treasury
equal to the Good’s current market price,
plus any modifier depicted on the Ship card.
The goods’ market prices are indicated on the
market track at the bottom of the board.

If the number of goods on the dock spaces
below the Ship is equal to the Ship’s hull size,
the Ship immediately “sets sail”, and the Ship’s
owner does the following:

Gain Influence
Hull size

ACTION 1: Sell Goods _ Example
Books are worth 5 réis; cloth and gold, 4 réis; and tools, 3 réis.
Green decides to sell 2 gold to his own Ship for 8 réis.The
red Ship pays +1 real per good, so he gets 10 réis; this
Ship is now full.
Green also sells 2 books to Purple’s Ship. Purple’s Ship
pays +2 réis per good, so Green gets a total of 14 réis for
the 2 books; this Ship is not yet full.
Green also has a tool in his warehouses that he was
hoping to sell, but he decides not to, so Purple’s Ship does
not set sail, giving her wigs. Green’s Ship sails away and
he gets 2 wigs.

1.	Flip the goods tokens on the dock spaces
below the Ship card face-down to show them
packed up in crates.
2.	Earn 1 wig per newly packed crate, as
indicated on the crates.
You can sell any number of goods to any Ships
(up to their capacity, of course). The number
of goods each Ship can carry is limited by the
Ship’s hull size. Goods sold to a Ship remain
face-up on the dock below the Ship until the
Ship is full and sails away.

Remember: Your Ships that are out to sea
(i.e. the goods on the dock below them are
face-down and thus packed up in crates) will
return to dock with empty cargo holds at the
beginning of your turn.

11

Why Each State Action Matters:

ACTION 2: TRADE WITH NOBLES
Nobles are able to make things happen much more quickly without having to wait for an official
visit, especially in exchange for certain goods…

When you take the Trade with Nobles action,
you trade 1 or 2 goods. Perform the following
steps for each good you trade:
1.	Select one of the six State actions that is not
currently covered with a good.

Office of Manuel da Maia (The Builder)
State Officials: You will send your
State Officials to work in Public
Buildings when you take the king’s
Noble action. Also, having your
State Officials in a Noble’s office
makes it harder for other players to visit that Noble!
Plans: You will use your Plans to
open Public Buildings when you take
the king’s Noble action. The number
of State Officials depicted on a Plan
tells you how many State Officials
you will need to assign and/or hire to run the
building. The more State Officials you send to work
in Public Buildings, the better your chances for wigs
at the end of the game.

2.	Identify which Noble performs this State
action, then take 1 of the type of good this
Noble seeks from your warehouses, and
cover the action. The goods each Noble
accepts are as follows:

Find the 6 State actions on the white banners in Nobles’ offices.

a.	Manuel da Maia (the Builder)
accepts tools, which represent
creation and construction, or gold.
b.	M arquis de Pombal (the Minister)
accepts books, which represent
wisdom and laws, or gold.
c.	Rei D. José I (the King) accepts
cloth, which represents vanity and
royalty, or gold.

Offer a tool in exchange for a Plan.

Note: You cannot take the same State
action twice in a single turn: Covering the
first action with a good prevents it from
being selected for the second action.

3.	Perform the State action.

The State Actions
Office of Manuel da Maia (the Builder)
Recruit State Officials

Acquire a Plan

State officials restored the order
necessary for the Public Buildings to
serve their function.

Office of Marquis de Pombal (The Minister)
Ships: You gain Influence with your
Ships, and any player can use them
to sell goods, which will earn you
wigs when the Ship is full and sets
sail.
Produce goods: Goods can be spent
to build Ships, can be traded to
Nobles for State actions, and can be
sold via Ships for money. You really
must keep some on hand at all times. Goods are
manufactured in your stores.

12

To recruit State Officials, move up to 2 State
Officials of your color from your player board
to 2 different Nobles’ offices. If the office
has no free space for your Official, determine
which color has the most State Official
meeples in that office, and move one of those
to the plaza below the office. In a tie, move
one of each tied color.

Pla

za

Architects Carlos Mardel and Eugénio
dos Santos drew up many plans for new
buildings in an incredibly short time,
like no others before or since, in the entire history of
Portugal.

To acquire a Plan, perform the following steps:
1.	Take the top Plan from either architect’s stack.
2.	Place it on the proper space on your player
board, architect-side-up. You can have any
number of Plans from both architects.

Build a Ship (Upgrade) _ Example

Office of Marquis de Pombal (the Minister)
Build a Ship
Exporting the majority of produced
goods to Flanders, Great Britain,
and Brazil helped pay for most of the
reconstruction of Lisboa.

To build a Ship, perform the following steps:
1.	Pay a number of different goods equal
to the hull size of the Ship visible in the
shipyard (or the difference in size if you are
replacing a Ship in your Portfolio). (Refer to
the table above the shipyard.)
Note: When you replace a Ship, leave
the old ship’s cargo where it is, so it is
automatically “loaded” onto the new ship.

2.	Select an empty slot at the top of your
player board (it doesn’t matter which one)
or discard a card from one of the slots, then
tuck the new card under your player board,
such that Treasury and Influence icons on
the bottom portion of the card are covered.

Orange decides to upgrade his size-1 Ship by trading
with the Marquis. He gives a gold to the Marquis.
Because he is upgrading the Ship from hull size 1 to
hull size 3, he must pay 2 different goods. He replaces
his size-1 Ship at the top of his player board. He moves
the Treasury marker up 1 space and gets 6 Influence:
1 from the new Ship card and 5 from a Marquis card
still in his Portfolio.

3.	Move the Treasury marker up 1 space,
because new Ships enable more commerce and
increased revenue for the Crown. The Treasury
marker cannot go beyond the confines of its
track.
4.	Earn the total Influence depicted at the
tops of the Noble and Ship cards in your
Portfolio (i.e. on the 1–3 cards at the top of
your player board) (see Gaining Influence,
page 10). Include the new Ship’s Influence
in this total.

Trades a Gold with the marquis to upgrade his Ship.

Build a Ship _ Example
Yellow plays a King card from her hand to her
Portfolio and receives a gold as reward.
Now she decides to take the Trade with Nobles
action (action 2). With this action she can choose
any of the 6 State actions in the Nobles’ offices,
provided she has the right goods to entice the
Noble(s) in question.
She already has a Ship, but decides one isn’t
enough. She gives the Marquis a book, and he gives
her access to the latest, greatest Ship.
The Ship under construction in the shipyard has
a hull size of 2, so she will need to pay 2 different
goods to get it. She pays the gold she just received
plus a cloth to the general supply.

Plays a King card to her Portfolio
and gets a gold.

Discards the King card because
her Portfolio limit is only 2.

Now she moves the Ship to a slot at the top of her
player board; however, her Portfolio was already at
capacity from playing the King card into it. So, she
must discard a card from her Portfolio before she
can dock the Ship there; she opts to get rid of the
King card she just played.
Finally, by covering the Influence and treasury icons
at the bottom of the Ship card, she receives 4 Influence
total from the two cards at the top of her player board,
and moves the treasury marker up 1 space.
Now she could still offer a second good to take a
second, different state action.

Trades a book with the Marquis to
allow her to build a Ship.

Pays 2 different goods to build a size-2 Ship.

Moves the treasury marker up 1 space and gets 4 Influence.

Gives another good to take
a second State action.

Pays 2 different goods to upgrade from a size-1 Ship to a size-3 Ship.

Resolves the Ship card: Moves the treasury marker up one space
and gains Influence.

Replaces the old Ship.
13

Production _ Example
For her 4 stores, Purple receives 2 books, 1 gold, and
1 cloth. Because books, gold, and cloth were produced,
the market prices for books, gold, and cloth go down 1
real.
Purple has completed only 1 rubble set, so her
warehouses can hold 3 of each type of good (2 + 1
rubble set). Nonetheless, in a later turn, she produces
again, receiving another 2 books, 1 gold, and 1 cloth.
She only has space for 3 of each type of good, so she
returns the fourth book to the supply. Books, gold, and
cloth go down 1 real in price.
In a still later turn, Purple produces one more time.
She already has the maximum number of books, so
none are produced. She takes 1 gold and 1 cloth, and
the prices for gold and cloth drop 1 real; the price of
books is unaffected because they were not produced.

Produce Goods
In old Lisboa, commerce had been
somewhat unusual, mostly because of
Portugal’s great wealth from discoveries
during the Renaissance. After the cataclysm, economic
recovery was one of the Marquis’ main political goals,
so his initiative built factories and stores.

To produce goods, perform the following steps:
1.	From each store you own, take 1 good of its
business type (i.e. the street it is facing) from
the general supply. If you receive more goods
than you can store of any particular type,
simply return the excess to the general supply.
2.	Each type of good produced drops 1 real in
price. Adjust its market price accordingly.

Remember: Each type of warehouse
can hold a number of goods equal to
2 + the number of rubble sets you
have completed (see Rubble Sets for
Reconstruction, page 9).
Note: The price drops for each type
of good produced, not for each good
produced. If a type of warehouse was full
before you produced, such that you receive
0 of that type of good, that type of good is
considered as not having been produced,
and thus its price does not drop.
Prices never increase.

Office of Rei D. José I (the King)
Meet the Cardinal
Purple produces 2 books, 1
gold, and 1 cloth. Books, gold,
and cloth prices go down 1 step.

To meet the Cardinal and get a Clergy tile,
perform the following steps:
1.	Advance the Cardinal meeple clockwise 1
or 2 spaces on the Clergy track around the
Church (his spaces are the gaps between the
Clergy tiles).
Later, she produces 2 books, 1
gold, and 1 cloth. Due the limit
of her warehouse she returns 1
book. All prices go down 1 step.

Clerg y Tiles

The Church had a lot of power through
the Jesuits during this time. That
power was a menace to the Marquis
de Pombal, so during his mandate, he
did everything he could to weaken the power of the
Church. Some of his actions were indisputably good,
like ending the Inquisition.

2.	Take either one of the two Clergy tiles
adjacent to the Cardinal, and place it faceup on an empty Clergy space on your player
board. If you already have 4 tiles, you
cannot take this action!

You can only have 4 of
these tiles at any given
moment of the game. Most
of the Clergy tiles give you
permanent benefits while
on your player board. (See
Clerg y tiles descriptions,
page 5 of Player Aid book.)

Cardinal Movement
There are two different icons that can move
the Cardinal: As we just saw, the King’s State
action that lets you Meet the Cardinal has
2 arrows, which moves the Cardinal 1 or 2
spaces; however, some cards and land rewards
depict this same icon with just a single arrow.
This moves the Cardinal only 1 space.

3.	Check to see if the Cardinal landed on or
passed over an icon (see Church Treasury
icon and Church Influence icon, next page).

Still later, she cannot produce
books due the lack of space in
her warehouse. Only the produced goods drop in price.

14

Move 1 or 2 spaces

Move 1 space

Church Treasury Icon
If the
Cardinal
landed
on or passed over
the Treasury icon,
move the Treasury
marker up 1 space.
The treasury marker
cannot go beyond the confines of its track.

Church Scoring _ Example
To show his loyalty to the Marquis, and
because he wants to Gain Influence, Green
chooses one of the 2 Clerg y tiles on his player
board, scores the 2 wigs on its back and
discard the tile. He could also score and
discard the other tile if he wants. Now he
receives 6 Influence given by the Noble and the
Ship he has in the top row of his Portfolio.

Office of D. José I (The King)

Church Influence Icon
If the Cardinal
landed on or
passed over the
Influence icon, Church
Scoring occurs at the end
of the active player’s turn.
Lay the Cardinal down to
remind you to do this.

Church Scoring
Church power is represented in the benefits
of the Clerg y tiles, and since the Marquis
de Pombal sees that power as a threat to
the Crown, you have the opportunity to
show your support for the Marquis, and earn some
Influence and wigs from the nobility, by renouncing
one or more of those benefits.

Each player, starting with the player who
moved the Cardinal, and going clockwise,
decides whether to gain Influence. If you
choose to gain Influence, perform the
following steps to do so:
1.	Discard 1 or more of your Clergy tiles.
2.	Earn the wigs depicted on their backs.
3.	 Gain Influence (see Gaining Influence, page 10).
At the end of the player’s turn stand the
Cardinal up on his current space.

Green discards and scores one
of his Clergy tiles.

He has 1 Ship and 1 Noble in
the top of his Portfolio.

Meet the Cardinal: Having Clerg y
tiles provides permanent benefits,
but they can also be surrendered
for wigs and Influence when the
Cardinal passes the Influence icon.
Get a Royal Favor: Having a Royal
Favor lets you Follow a visit to that
Noble on someone else’s turn. This
means an extra action!

He Gains Influence, which earns him the total Influence from all
the cards he has in the top of his Portfolio.

Get a Royal Favor
Nothing is more powerful than a favor
from King D. José himself:
“I was a generous King and was aware of my power to
speed up the rebuilding of the city.” He also liked to
give his friends extravagant gifts.

Each Royal Favor tile depicts one of the 3
Nobles, and allows you to take an extra action
in that Noble’s office during any other player’s
turn (see Follow a Visit, next page).
To get a Royal Favor, perform the following
steps:
1.	Take any type of Royal Favor tile that you
do not already have and place it on the
appropriate space on your player board.
Note: You can have only 1 Royal Favor
tile for each Noble at any given time.

Note: if you have no Clergy tiles you
can’t participate in the Church Scoring,
and you thus don’t earn any Influence.

Why Each State Action Matters:

The Marq uis’ and the King’s Roles
Enlightenment ideals proved particularly useful
in loosening the State’s stranglehold on economic
activities.
This was a period in which the King was directly
involved in the creation of laws and regulations.
The monarch acted as a legislator. Issues relating to
overseas economic and political administration were
also within the Crown’s purview.
Reinforcement of royal authority in Portugal in the
second half of the eighteenth century led to an increase
in State control. The King would delegate certain tasks
and functions to be performed by scattered individuals,
who were then rewarded with royal favors.
But the King at this time had no love of making
decisions, so he granted all these privileges to the
Marquis of Pombal. The Marquis was keen on
enlightenment notions pertaining to economy, natural
resources, educational reform, and incentives to create
new jobs. This resulted in a plethora of decrees, laws,
and permits during his time governing.
This increase of State clout in the political decisionmaking process also shifted the balance of power in the
relationship between the State and the Church toward
the State.
In fact, this redefined relationship led to a general
decrease in Church Influence over public and social
domains, as well as substantial reduction of its
privileges and immunities.

15

ACTION 3: VISIT A NOBLE

Follow a Visit _ Example
Yellow just visited the King. Now, Purple wants to
Follow, so she returns her Royal Favor tile to the King’s
stack on the board, and Spends Influence. Purple can
choose between Opening a Public Building, Getting a
Royal Favor tile, or Meeting the Cardinal. She decides
to Meet the Cardinal, to take a Clerg y tile.

Visiting one of the 3 Nobles adds new paths to your strateg y. Not only does it give you access to
one of that Noble’s State actions without trading a good, it also gives you access to his powerful
Noble action. And nothing is more useful than aid from the most influential personalities of that time. But beware:
Anyone with the right favor from the King can follow you right through the door to take advantage of your visit!

To Visit a Noble, perform the following steps:

Follow a Visit

1.	Play a Noble card from your hand to the
Royal Court on the gameboard.

After you finish your Visit, each of your opponents
(going clockwise from you) who has a Royal Favor
tile corresponding to the Noble you visited may
Follow that Visit. Anyone who decides to follow a
visit must perform the following steps:

2.	Place your Courtier meeple atop the card as
a reminder that it is your turn, in case other
players follow your visit.
Purple returns the Royal
Favor tile to the King.

She chooses to Meet the
cardinal.

Spending Influence _ Example 1
Orange plays a King card into the royal court. The
King’s office has 4 officials from other players and the
Treasury marker is at +1, meaning that he needs to
spend 5 Influence to visit the King. So, he moves his
marker 5 spaces back on the Influence track.

3.	Spend Influence to Visit the Noble (see
Spending Influence to Visit a Noble, next
column).
4.	Optionally, you may take either one of this
Noble’s State actions without having to pay
a good.
5.	And then, you must take the Noble action.

Remember: If you cannot fully perform the
Noble action, you are not allowed to visit
that Noble at all.

1.	Return their Royal Favor tile to its stack.
2.	Spend Influence to Visit the Noble (see below).
3.	Then take one of the three actions this Noble
offers: i.e. either the Noble action, or one of
the two State actions for this Noble (without
having to pay a good).
After each of your opponents has had a chance
to Follow, return your Courtier meeple to its
space at the edge of the Royal Court and discard
your Noble card from the Royal Court. (As
usual, the player to your left goes next.)

Spending Influence
to Visit a Noble
In order to Visit a Noble or Follow a Visit,
you must spend Influence by moving your
Influence marker leftward on the Influence
track. The amount of Influence you must
spend is calculated as follows:

The Visit costs 5 Influence.

Spending 5 Influence from the
Influence track.

Purple plays a card into the Royal Court and places her
Courtier meeple on it.

Spending Influence _ Example 2

If the total is less than 0, treat it as 0.
If (and only if ) you do not have enough
Influence, you can pay the difference in
wigs. 1 wig = 1 Influence.

Green needs to spend 4 Influence to Visit a Noble, but
he only has 2 Influence. He moves his Influence marker
2 steps to the left, and pays for the rest of the Influence
cost by moving his score marker back 2 spaces.

She Spends Influence.

Paying for the first 2 Influence
from the Influence track.

16

Paying last 2 Influence with
wigs.

The Influence value to the left of the Treasury
marker, plus the number of State Officials in
that Noble’s office (but not his office plaza)
belonging to other players (including neutral
ones in a 2-player game).

She may take one of the 2 State
actions, and then she must take
the Noble action.

This aid on the board reminds you of the Visit/Follow cost.

+
To Visit or Follow, Orange would have to pay 4 Influence: 1
from the Treasury marker + 3 from opponents’ officials in that
Noble’s office.

Build a Store _ Example

THE NOBLE ACTIONS
Manuel da Maia (The Builder)

Calculating Land Price
The price of the land space on which you wish
to build is equal to the current Treasury value
to the right of the Treasury marker, plus the
total cost of all remaining Rubble cubes in the
land space’s column and row of the city map
(not on Public Building spaces).

Purple selects the city tile from the Book (brown) space
of the display, which therefore must face Rua Nova da
Princesa (the brown street). After taking a Rubble cube
from the row or column of the chosen space, getting the
reward from the space and paying for the land, Purple
places the new City tile as depicted below, then moves a
wooden house from her player board onto the new City
tile, marking the store as hers.

Rubble costs are as follows:

Build a Store
To build a store, perform the
following steps:
1.	Select an available City tile from the display.
The space from which you take it dictates
the type of business the store will be, and
the street its entrance (notch) must face.
2.	Select an empty land space touching the street
that matches the business color from Step 1.
3.	Get the reward depicted on the land space,
then place the City tile on the space, with its
entrance facing the appropriate street.
4.	Take 1 Rubble cube from either the row or
the column of that space (if there are any),
and put it at the leftmost matching empty
space on your player board (if there’s no
room, remove the cube from the game).
5.	Pay for the land (see Calculating Land
Price, at right) with réis.
6.	Move a wooden house from your player board
onto the City tile, close to the entrance (see
Choosing Which Wooden House, page 18).
7.	Earn wigs for building the store (see Earning
Wigs for Your New Store, page 18).

Note: At the start of
your turn, the display
of available City tiles
will have one tile on
each space. Large
City tiles are built
on the square spaces
of downtown. Small
City tiles are built on the half-size spaces on
the thin, rightmost column of the grid.
Note from the designer: There aren’t any
differences between the big city buildings and the
small ones. I just wanted to keep the original city
plan of Lisboa intact.

Earthquake (brown) rubble costs 3 réis.
Fire (red) rubble costs 2 réis.
Tsunami (blue) rubble costs 1 real.

This aid on the board reminds you of the rubble costs.

Note: Be sure to check the Treasury
cards in your Portfolio and Clergy tiles
on your player board for applicable
money or sales benefits!

Take a city tile from the display,
from the color of your choice.

Choose a space next to the
street of the same color.

Take a rubble from the row or
column of the chosen space.

Get the reward from the land
space and place the tile facing
the correct street.

Pay réis for the land.

Place a wooden house on the
building next to the entrance.

Buy Land _ Example
Yellow is building a bookstore on row E, and she
already got the reward from the space. Before taking
a Rubble cube, the plot of land would cost 15 réis:
3 réis (because the Treasury marker is on 3) + 9 réis
(3 Earthquake rubble cubes × 3 réis) + 3 réis (3
Tsunami rubble cubes × 1 real).
Yellow takes one of the Earthquake Rubble cubes,
which not only helps her create a set of rubble, but
also reduces her land cost by 3 réis. The final land
cost will be 12 réis. She checks her Portfolio and
player board for any money benefits, but there are
none to be found.

Treasury indicates 3 réis.

To the right there are 3 brown
cubes (9 réis).

To the bottom of the column
there are 3 blue cubes (3 réis).

She takes a brown cube to
lower the cost by 3 réis.

17

Manuel da Maia (The Builder)

(1677_1768)
Manuel da Maia was the kingdom’s master builder.
He had the responsibility of choosing, approving, and
managing every new architectural project in the city.
He also chose the architects and engineering teams
involved in the projects. He immediately recruited two
chief architects to rebuild Lisboa:
Architect Eugénio dos Santos, who was the main
architect behind downtown projects and the Praça do
Comércio, one of the most important works of Lisboa.
Architect Carlos Mardel, who was also the main
architect of Ribeira das Naus, used to build the Ships
headed for Brazil, and is credited for the Rossio and
many other city projects since.

Downtown Stores
Rebuilding Lisboa was exactly what Manuel da Maia
and his architects were asked to do, and they did so
with extreme success, using very modern processes with
military-grade organization and precision.
Stores opened in downtown buildings brought new
life and commerce to the new city, nurturing and
strengthening the fragile economy that remained after
the destruction. Constructing a store is the first step to
rebuilding the economy.
According to the new city plans, each street must only
host businesses of certain related types. For example,
only goldsmiths and watchmakers would have a
storefront on Rua Aurea, and businesses of those types
could only open a store on Rua Aurea.
During the reconstruction of the city, treasures were
found in the wreckage. Many of them were claimed by
the buyer of the land, and others were returned to the
previous owners in exchange for a reward.
Stores produce goods for you, and get you wigs for
each relevant Public Building in its row and street
(including future ones!)

Public Building scoring a
store on the same street.

18

Public Building scoring a store
on the same row.

Choosing a Wooden House
On your player board, there are 3 groups of
wooden houses, and each group grants you
special abilities as you build the houses from
it. Each group is completely independent
of the other, and you must always take the
bottommost house in whichever group you
choose. Once you unlock a special ability,
it remains unlocked until you replace it
by reaching the next special ability in that
group, which supersedes the previous one.

Left Group: 2 wooden houses
1.	No new ability.
2.	Allows you to spend réis instead
of Influence (1 real = 1 Influence) in
order to Visit (or Follow a Visit to)
a Noble.

Example
Orange wants to visit the King, but the Treasury
marker indicates 1 Influence, and there are 5 State
Officials from other players at the King’s office,
for a total cost of 6 Influence. Orange only has 1
Influence. Fortunately, he has already built both
houses from his left group, so he spends 1 Influence
and 5 réis, and visits the King after all. If he had
wanted to, he could even have paid entirely in réis,
and saved his Influence for later.

Middle Group: 3 wooden houses
1.	 When you build a Ship, pay 1
fewer good.
2.	No new ability. #1 is still in effect.
3.	 When you build a Ship, don’t
pay any of the required goods; that
is, you always get the Ship for free.

Example
Green trades a book to the Marquis to get a size3 Ship. He has built 2 of the 3 houses from the
middle group, so he pays 1 1 fewer good. Green
only has to pay 2 different goods, instead of 3.

Right Group: 3 wooden houses
1.	 When you Produce Goods, take
one additional good of a single
type that you produced (only if
you have space in your warehouse).
2.	No new ability. #1 is still in effect.
3.	When you Produce Goods, take
1 additional good of each type
that you produced (only if you
have space in your warehouse).

Example
Yellow has only gold in her warehouse. She has 2
cloth stores, 1 book store, and 1 tool store, and has
built all 3 houses from her right group. When she
Produces Goods, she takes 3 cloth, 2 books, 2 tools.

Earning Wigs for Your New Store
For this process, the only relevant Public
Buildings are the Public Buildings (if any) with
the matching color and either in the same row
of your store, or on the same street that your
store is facing; these are the ones driving traffic to
your new store. There can at most be 3 relevant
Public Buildings. One at the top, one at the left
and another one at the right.

Calculate the number of wigs you earn as
follows:
1.	Find the large number on the scoring tile
at the bottom of the column in which you
built your store.
2.	Multiply that value by the number of
relevant Public Buildings.

Example

Marq u is de Po mb al (Th e Ministe r)

The store that Green just built on the yellow street
(which thus is a goldsmith) matches 2 relevant
Public Buildings showing yellow, and the wig
reward in the store’s column is 4. 4 wigs per match
× 2 matches = 8 wigs, so she earns 8 wigs.

Note: Relevant Public Buildings will
earn wigs for the store owners, even if
the Public Building is built later than
the store (see Open a Public Building,
page 20).

West Public Building is relevant. Score it.

Score the relevant Public Buildings to the
north and west — relevant because they
have the same color as the street where
the store was built.

North Public Building is relevant. Score it.

East Public Building is irrelevant. Skip it.

Designer’s Tip
Build Stores early in the game, to make sure you can produce goods whenever you need them. Since each store may
have as many as 3 relevant Public Buildings in its row and street, you might score the same store up to 3 times.
Building a store is a very strategic move. You may choose to do so for the reward you get from the land, for the
type of goods you want to produce, for the wigs earned from Public Buildings, or even for the decrees or majorities
at the end of the game. Use a combination of a few of these variables to determine the optimal move for you.

Marquis de Pombal (The Minister)

they do not reward other players.
•	 There is no limit to the number of Decrees
you may own. ( See Decree Cards descriptions,
page 6 of Player Aid book.)

Use a Rubble Set Marker to Take
an Extra Decree _ Example

Take a Decree
Decrees earn you wigs at the end of
the game, if you meet their criteria.
Simply select one of the Decree cards from the
display and place it face-up next to your player
board.
If you have a Rubble Set marker on the
marquis you may discard it to take an extra
decree. You cannot discard more than one
Rubble Set marker per turn.
•	 Your Decree cards are always visible to all
players.
•	 Only you can score for your Decree cards;

Purple played a Marquis card to the Royal Court.
She must take a decree as the Noble action. She
also has 2 Rubble Set markers on the Marquis.
After taking one decree, she discards one of the
markers to take another decree from the display. She
can’t discard the 2nd marker, because she can only
discard one Rubble Set marker cube per turn, and
thus it is not possible to get more than one extra
decree per turn.

(1 6 9 9 _ 1 7 8 2 )
Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo was the minister
of foreign affairs and later the prime minister of
Portugal. He was the head of the government from
1755 to 1777. This nobleman was responsible for
Lisboa being rebuilt in a way that embraced new
Enlightenment political ideals. His politics were
heavily Influenced by innovative mercantilist ideas
on free trade and regulated commercial activity; he
adopted such notions from England, and he adapted
military organizational ideas from the AustroHungarian empire where he worked a number of
years as an ambassador. His Enlightenment ideals also
helped him crush the opposition and suppress criticism
about consolidating personal power and profit. Melo
implemented great economic and financial reform
by creating several companies and guilds to regulate
every commercial activity. He demarcated the region
for production of port, which was the first attempt to
control wine quality and production in Europe.
In the days after the earthquake, when someone asked
him what will happen now, he answered simply, “Now
we bury the dead and take care of the living.”

The Decrees
As a man of state, Marquis de Pombal was the man
who really ruled the country. He was the one who
dictated the rules of the game.

Goal

Scoring

At the end of the game, this Decree rewards 1 wig for
each opened Public Building from the Blue architect.

19

D. José I (The King)

D. José I (The King)

Open a Public Building
(1714_1777)
After the earthquake, the King, a very religious man,
feared that divine intervention could repeat those
terrible events. So, he moved the royal court to a
wooden palace on top of a hill in Lisboa. The new
palace was called the Real Barraca (Royal Tent), and
soon wooden houses become trendy. (The Real Barraca
went up in flames 40 years later.)
Because he could not face all the tragedy and
devastation, the King gave full powers to Minister
Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo, future Marquis of
Pombal, to run the city and the country. After that,
public appearances from the King and Queen were
often related with openings of new buildings, visits to
the opera, or hunting.

Public Buildings
In the wake of the destruction, the King is more than
happy to perform a ribbon-cutting for the opening of a
new Public Building, which will revitalize downtown
and attract people to reconstructed stores.
When you Open a Public Building, you stimulate
growth of the downtown, which earns wigs for the
owners of the stores helped by the new traffic. This
doesn’t merely increase traffic to the stores, it also
shapes the nature of the traffic to those stores, so your
choice of Public Building and its location will have a
hand in the success or failure of any given business in
the neighborhood….
Opening a Public Building also completes the
architect’s Plan and creates new jobs for State
Officials. Putting more people to work than your
opponents will earn you wigs at the end of the game.

Public Buildings determine which
stores will score. Once opened,
they score all stores matching one of their two
colors in the same row, or all stores facing
their same street.
To Open a Public Building, you must have
a Plan from the architect who designed the
Public Building you wish to open, and the
number of State Officials indicated on the Plan
in Nobles’ offices (and/or plazas), or at least
enough réis needed to hire the rest.
To open a Public Building, perform the
following steps:

20

Future Public Buildings

7.	Finally, move the top tile from the
architect’s stack of Public Buildings to the
newly empty space.

Yellow just opened this Public Building. It scores all cloth stores
(pink street) and bookstores (brown street) in the same row.

1.	Select a Public Construction Site space at
the west, north, or east side of downtown.
Note: A Public Building along the north
side of downtown must have a color
that matches the street on which it sits.
The space itself is this color, too, so you
can’t miss it.
2.	Take both Rubble cubes from the space, and
place them at the leftmost matching empty
spaces on your player board, then take the
reward depicted on the construction site space.

Regardless of who opened the Public Building, the owners of the
matching stores score. So, Yellow scores 2 stores, Green scores 1
store, and Purple scores none.

3.	Select and show the other players any one
of your incomplete Plans, and then take
the available Public Building tile matching
that architect and place it on the space,
(be careful not to flip it over to the other
architect’s side).
4.	Return a number of your State Officials,
indicated on the chosen Plan, from the
Nobles’ offices/plazas to your player board. If
you don’t have enough there, you can hire the
rest (see Hiring State Officials, next page).

Available Public Buildings

6.	For an east or west Public Building, the
owner of each store in the same row earns
wigs if the store faces a street of any of the
colors on the Public Building. For a north
Public Building, the owner of each store
facing its street earns wigs. The number
of wigs a store earns its owner is the large
number on the Scoring tile at the bottom of
the store’s column.

5.	Flip the used Plan tile and place it on the
Completed Plans space on your player
board.

The top tile from the chosen architect’s stack is moved to fill the
empty space with a new Public Building.

Open a Public Building _ Example

Hiring State Officials
After such a catastrophe, many people lost their jobs, but the rebuilding of the city and the opening of a new Public
Buildings bring the fresh fragrance of employment opportunities, which readily draws prospective workers. So don’t
worry if you have insufficient State Officials working for the Nobles: Surely you can hire the rest for the going wages…

Each Plan tile depicts the number of State
Officials required to operate the building
according to the architect’s vision. You must
reassign that many of your State Officials from
the Nobles’ offices/plazas to the new Public
Building at the opening.
If (and only if ) you do not have enough State

Officials available among the Nobles’ offices
and plazas, then you may hire the rest of the
State Officials at the last minute.
The price for each new hire is equal to the
current Treasury value, which is to the right of
the Treasury marker.

H i r i n g S t a t e O ff i c i a l s _ E x a m p l e
In order to open this blue architect’s Public
Building, using this Plan from the blue architect,
Orange would need to provide 3 State Officials. He
has 1 State Official in a Noble’s office and 1 in a
Noble’s plaza. He must use those 2, and then he can
hire the third one to satisfy the requirements of the
Plan. Hiring that State Official costs him 5 réis,
because that is the current Treasury value.
He also looks at his Portfolio and Clerg y tiles to
make sure he doesn’t have any benefit that affects the
number of officials needed, or the price to hire them
on the spot.

The Plan requires 3 Officials.

Orange takes 2 from Offices/
Plazas and hires 1 more.

Purple has a Plan from the blue architect, and
thus decides to Open a Public Building designed by
the blue architect. After she makes sure the Public
Building tile is relevant to gold stores (the business she
wants to score), she takes both Rubble cubes from the
space where she wants to build, along with the gold
depicted in that space as the ruins reward, and she
places them in their proper places on her player board.
Then she takes the blue architect’s available Public
Building tile and places it on the now empty space.
The Plan tells her that 2 State Officials will be
required to run this building. So, she moves those
officials from the office(s) and/or plaza(s) of any
Noble(s) back to her player board, and flips the Plan
face-down, placing it in the appropriate space of her
player board.
Now it’s time to score: There are 4 Gold stores facing
Rua Áurea. On the west side of the street, there is 1
of Purple’s and 1 of Green’s; each of these is worth
3 wigs, as indicated by the tile at the bottom of those
stores’ column. On the east side of the street, Yellow
and Purple each have 1 store, worth 4 wigs each.
So, Purple earns 7 wigs (3+4); Yellow, 4 wigs; and
Green, 3 wigs.
To finalize her action, she moves the top Public
Building tile from the blue architect into the empty
space of the display.

ACTION 4: SPONSOR AN EVENT
To Sponsor an Event depicted on a Treasury
card in your hand, perform the following steps:
1.	Play the Treasury card from your hand to
the Royal Court.

Purple chooses the space to build, takes the reward and both Rubble cubes from the space and places them on her player board.

2.	Pay réis equal to the current Treasury value.
3.	Perform the action / receive the reward
depicted in the center of the Treasury card.
( See Actions from Treasury Cards, page 7 of
Player Aid book.)

TAKE A POLITICAL CARD

She takes the chosen building, returns the number of officials
stated in the Plan from any offices/plazas, and flips the used Plan.

To finish your turn, take any face-up Political
card from the Political card display. This
brings your hand back up to 5 cards.
Remember: Each deck has only one type
of cards. From left to right you will find
the Manuel’s deck, the Marquis’ deck,
the King’s deck, and the Treasury deck.

Score all the stores in the same street of the Public Building. Then,
the top Public Building of the same architect becomes available.
21

END OF TURN

END OF PERIOD

END OF THE GAME

•	Reveal a New Political Card:

As soon as anyone completes their 2nd set of
rubble or 3 Political card decks in the display
are empty, finish the current turn, discard
all the remaining cards in the display, then
perform the following steps:

As soon as anyone completes 4 sets of Rubble,
or once again 3 Political card decks in the
display are empty, finish the current round,
so all players have taken the same number of
turns in the game.

1.	Each player receives 3 wigs for each set of
Rubble cubes on their player board.

Then, play a final round and perform the
endgame scoring.

If any, flip the top card of the deck face-up to
reveal a replacement for the card you took.

•	Refill the City Tile Display:
Refill any empty spaces in the City tile display.

•	Refill the Church Track:
Refill any empty Clergy tile spaces on the
Church track from the bag of Clergy tiles.

•	Refill the Decrees Display:
Refill any empty spaces of the Decree card
display with new cards from the deck. There
should be 8 cards.

•	Remove Goods from the State Actions:
Return any goods on the State actions to the
general supply. There would be a good on 1–2
State actions if you took the Trade with Nobles
action this turn.
Note: There are always 2 Public
Buildings available, because you fill the
Public Building space as soon as you
take one. So, you never need to refill
the Public Building display at the end
of the turn.

Rubble Sets, Revisited
Stored rubble sets contribute to the reconstruction
of the city, and their clever use in the robust Gaiola
Pombalina structural design pleases the Marquis.

You have spaces on your player board for 5
sets of rubble that you can complete during
the game. In addition to the Portfolio and
warehouse capacity benefits this gives you
(see Rubble Sets for Reconstruction, page 9),
completing sets also helps set the pace for the
game. If you complete your 2nd set of rubble,
the End of the Period is triggered. In the same
way, if you complete your 4th set of rubble,
the End of the Game is triggered.
Furthermore, each set of rubble you complete
is worth 3 wigs both at the End of the Period
and at the End of the Game.

22

2.	 Discard any Ship cards remaining in the
shipyard. Replace them with the purple size-3
and brown size-4 Ship cards, with the purple
size-3 Ship(s) on top.
3.	Starting with the player who triggered the end
of the period and following in clockwise order,
each player may discard any number of cards
from their hand. Each player earns the reward
at the bottom of one of each type of Noble
card discarded this way. (Ignore penalties).
4.	Each player draws back up to a 5-card hand
from the purple Political card deck (1763–
1768). Return the remaining cards to the box.
5.	Prepare the brown Political card deck (1769–
1777) the same way you prepared the red
Political card deck (1757–1763) at the start of
the game.
If needed refill the Church track and Decrees
display. Then continue play from the next
player in turn order.

Example
Green follows Yellow’s visit, and triggers the end of
the period by taking a Rubble cube and completing his
2nd rubble set.
After each player earns 3 wigs for each rubble set on
their player board, Green discards first (because he
triggered the end of the period). He discards 2 King
cards and 1 Treasury card. He receives the reward from
only one of the King cards.
Purple is next in turn order, and she discards 1 King
card, 1 Marquis card, and 2 Manuel da Maia cards.
Thus, she receives the reward from the King card, the
reward from the Marquis card, and the reward from
one of the Manuel da Maia cards.
Yellow is next, she discards 2 Treasury cards, which
provides no reward.
Orange discards no cards.
Finally, each player fills their hand back to 5 cards by
drawing from the purple (1763–1768) deck.
After all steps are done, Orange starts the new period
because he is after Yellow in turn order, and the first
period ended during Yellow’s turn.

Example
Yellow has the Starting Player tile. Green is at her
right so he is the last player in the round. After Green
has taken his last turn, Yellow begins a final round in
which each player takes one more turn, and then the
endgame scoring takes place.

ENDGAME SCORING
To your total wigs on the score track, add the
following:

4.	Cash out your Influence for réis,
then earn 1 Wig for each 5 réis
you have (rounded down). Do not
move the Influence marker.

1.	Wigs equal to the sum of the hull
sizes of the Ships in your Portfolio.

7.	2 wigs for each Royal Favor tile
you have on your board.

Example
Green has a Royal Favor from the King and another
one from the Marquis. This will gets him 4 wigs.

Example

Example

Green has 1 size-2 Ship and 2 size-3 Ships. He gets
8 wigs.

Purple has 13 réis in her hand, but she also has 4 réis
on the Influence track. So she scores 3 wigs.

2.	3 Wigs for each completed set of
Rubble cubes.

Use any marker on the icons in the bottomright corner of the gameboard to track the
endgame scoring.

Example
Orange ended the game with 3 completed sets of
rubble, he gets 9 wigs.

3.	Wigs for having more stores of
a type than your opponents, per
the following table:
If you have no stores of a particular type, you
earn no wigs for that type.
In a 2-player game count only ‘ The most’ and
the ‘3rd-most’ positions.
Player

The most 2nd-most 3rd-most

Stores
Gold

3 wigs

2 wigs

1 wig

Tool

6 wigs

3 wigs

1 wig

Book

9 wigs

6 wigs

3 wigs

Cloth

9 wigs

6 wigs

3 wigs

Example
Green has 5 tool stores, Orange has 2, and Purple
and Yellow have none. Green gets 6 wigs, Orange
gets 3 wigs, but Purple and Yellow get none,
because they had no tool stores.

In a tie, add the tied places, then divide the
points among the tied players, rounded down.

Example
Purple has 4 cloth stores, Yellow and Orange
both have 3, and Green has 1. Purple gets 9 wigs,
Yellow and Orange are tied, so they each get (6 +
3) ÷ 2 = 4 wigs, and Green gets none.

5.	Wigs from your Decree cards that
you fulfill. Nobody else can score
from your Decree cards.

Example
Yellow has 2 decrees, one that gives her 2 wigs
and another one that gives her 6 wigs. (See Decree
Cards descriptions, page 6 of Player Aid book.)

6.	W igs for having put more State
Officials to work in Public
Buildings than your opponents
(simply count the total number
of State Officials depicted on your completed
Plans), per the following table:
If you have no completed Plans, you earn no
wigs for this.
Player

Tiebreakers:
1.	The player with the most sets of rubble.
2.	The player with the most stores.
3.	The player with the most completed Plans.
4.	The player with the most money.
If it is still a tie after all that, the tied players
must rest with the satisfaction that they rebuilt
a devastated Lisboa into a great city.

The most 2nd-most 3rd-most

Game
3 — 4 players 15 wigs

10 wigs

2 players

5 wigs

15 wigs

5 wigs

In a tie, add the tied places, then divide the
points among the tied players, rounded down.

Example
At the end of the game, Orange has completed Plans
that put a total of 8 State Officials to work in Public
Buildings. Green and Yellow have each completed
Plans with 5 State Officials, and Purple only completed
one Plan for 3 Officials. Since this is a 4-player game,
Orange earns 15 wigs, Green and Yellow each earn
(10 + 5) ÷ 2 = 7 wigs, and Purple earns none.

23

Two More Great Games By Vital Lacerda

THE GALLERIST

VINHOS DELUXE

$79.99

$79.99

The Age of Art and Capitalism has created the need for a
new occupation - The Gallerist. Blending the talents of an
Art Dealer, Museum Curator, and Artists’ Manager, you are
about to take on that job! Build your fortune by running the
most lucrative Gallery ever, and thus win the game by having
visitors in your gallery, exhibiting and selling works of art,
investing in artists’ promotion to increase art value, achieving
trends and notoriety as well as curator and dealer goals.

Like fine wine, many of the best things in life get better
with age! Combine the early efforts of the immensely
talented games designer Vital Lacerda on the classic
board game Vinhos; add the inspired new artwork of
Ian O’Toole; and polish it all off with the Deluxe Edition
production talents of the team at Eagle-Gryphon Games.
Et voilà, a new star is born: the 2016 Vinhos Deluxe
Edition board game! Vinhos Deluxe Edition supports one to
four players and takes 30 to 45 minutes per player to play.

Purchase these titles, and many others, at www.eaglegames.net

If you have any questions, please email us at: info@eagle-gryphon.com
LIKE us on Facebook: www.facebook.com/EagleGryphon
FOLLOW us on Twitter: @EagleGames

© 2017 Eagle-Gryphon Games,
801 Commerce Drive, building #5,
Leitchfield, KY 42754
All Rights Reserved.
www.eagle-gryphon.com

http://bit.ly/2ilVX3a
Official Game Web Page
and Rules Video

