The XIIIth Century in Europe

1

MEDIEVAL
The XIIIth Century in Europe
by Richard H. Berg

TAB LE O F C O NTE NTS
Introduction ....................................................

2

7.0 Knights of Christ ............................................

9

1.0 Game Components .........................................

2

8.0 Additional Action Cards .................................

9

2.0 Prepare to Play ...............................................

3

9.0 Attack .............................................................

11

3.0 General Course of Play ..................................

4

10.0 Naval Rules ....................................................

12

4.0 Powers And Control .......................................

5

11.0 Mercenaries ....................................................

12

5.0 The Mongols ..................................................

7

12.0 Victory Conditions .........................................

13

6.0 Pope Cards ......................................................

7

Example of Play ......................................................

15

GMT GAMES
P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
www.GMTGames.com
© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

# 0211

2

Medieval

INTRODUCTION
Medieval: The XIIIth Century in Europe is a card game for 3 to 5
players, covering, very loosely, the events, situations and rivalries of
the 13th century. Medieval uses the “Enigma” system, in which the
playing “map” is represented by cards, not all of which are present at
the start.
The 13th century saw the Papacy at the peak of its power, the Holy
Roman Empire struggling to remain cohesive, England under the turmoil of baronial revolts, the emergence of monarchial France, the
Teutonic Knights looking to extend their powers, Venice controlling
the seas of the Mediterranean, Spain continuing the Reconquista, while
Islam started its rejuvenation process under the Mameluks. And then
there were the Mongols…

inconvenience and ask that you contact us to receive any replacement parts needed.
Please send your correspondence to:

GMT Games
ATTN: Medieval
PO Box 1308
Hanford, CA 93230 USA
Phone: 559-583-1236 (800-523-6111 toll free in USA and Canada)
Fax: 559-582-7775 • E-Mail: gmtoffice@aol.com
1.1 The Rules

Each player takes the role of several medieval powers and tries to
gain control over as many Powers and their provinces as possible.

Each major section of the rules is assigned a whole number (1.0,
2.0,...). Subordinate rules are assigned a corresponding number to
the right of the decimal place. For example: 2.1, 2.2,... under rule
2.0. This system allows quick and easy cross referencing of rules.

AVERAGE PLAYING TIME: 2 hours

1.2 The Map
The Map Cards, when they are all laid out, show Europe, the Middle
East and North Africa as it appeared in the first half of the 13th century. When all map cards are in play, they are displayed thusly:

1. GAME COMPONENTS
Each copy of Medieval: The XIIIth Century in Europe includes:

• 110 cards; divided into 19 Map Cards, 27 Power Cards (which
double as Action Cards) and 64 (additional) Action Cards
• 140 die-cut counters
• “Play money” in 1 Fl, 5 Fl and 10 Fl denominations
• One Rules Booklet
• One Player Aid Card
• Two six-sided dice (one red, one white)

1F
1A

1B

1C

1D

1E

2A

2B

2C

2D

3A

3B

3C

3D

4B

4C

4D

2F

If any of these parts are missing or damaged, we apologize for the

Excommunicated
Marker

Good
Ruler

Civil War
Marker

Normal
Ruler

Disaster
Marker

Bad
Ruler

Knights of Christ
Marker

Marriage
Marker

3F

Cards 1B, 1D, 2A, 2B, 2C, 3A, 3D, and 4D (shaded), start the game
displayed; the rest of the Map Cards are set aside for drawing during
the game. Note there are no 2E, 3E, 4A or 4E cards.
Some Powers (“countries”) are all on one card (e.g., Hungary, on
card 2C); many cover two or more cards (e.g., The Holy Roman
Empire). Powers that are on more than one card are considered to
have that many “provinces.” Each sea or ocean on a card is considered a separate Naval Area.

1.3 The Cardboard Counters
Control
Markers

10 Florins

5 Florins

1 Florin

CONTROL MARKERS: Each player gets these markers in his chosen color—it matters little who gets what color. They are used, when
needed, to indicate who controls a Power or province within that
Power. There are also Knights of Christ control markers (see 7.1–
7.3).
INFORMATIONAL MARKERS: These are used to denote certain
statuses, such as Excommunicated, Marriage, etc. Use these as needed
and described below.

1.4 The Cards
Medieval includes 110 cards, divided into two types: Map and Action.
© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

The XIIIth Century in Europe
MAP CARDS: They represent the “playing surface”, which becomes
displayed gradually, during play. The Map Cards contain an Identity
Code (e.g., 2C, 3B etc.), a single number indicating Income (in Florins) for each province on that card, and a Mongol Defense Rating
(see 5.0).
Map cards that are displayed at the start of the game are identified by
the bird symbol in their lower left corner.
Provinces on a Map Card with horizontal stripes are eligible to be
Knights of Christ provinces (see 7.2).
ACTION CARDS: These cards provide the players with things they
must/may use and/or do during their turn. Depending on the number
of players, from 8 to 10 of the Powers Action Cards are part of the
initial set-up and do not become part of the Deck, see 2.2.

1.5 Game Tables
Medieval uses the Powers Table and the Leader Table for various
functions during the game; see the Player Aid Card.

1.6 The Dice
The game uses one or two six-sided dice. If only one die is rolled,
that is listed as 1d6. If both dice are used, they are either read consecutively, red die first (2d11-66), or totalled (2d12). The initials DRM
are used often; they stand for “Die Roll Modifier”, a number applied
to the actual die roll to get the final figure used to resolve whatever
the die roll was for.

1.7 The Game’s Currency
Medieval uses the “Golden Florin” (abbreviated Fl) as its currency.
Players get Income in one of three ways:
• When they undertake Income Collection (see 3.4).
• When they gain initial control of a Power (see 4.4). In this case
they receive, immediately, the Start Fls as per the card.
• When a Pope card is played all Knights of Christ controlled provinces receive the province’s income (see 7.2).
Players may keep their available Income secret from other players
and “hide” their play money.
HISTORICAL NOTE: The Florin (Latin: florenus) was introduced in
1252. It was first coined in Florence but became universally used in
Europe. In Germany it was known as the “Gulden” or “Goldgulden”.

3

2. PREPARE FOR PLAY
2.1 Prepare the Map and Map Deck
Map Cards 1B, 1D, 2A, 2B, 2C, 3A, 3D and 4D are removed from
the Map card deck and displayed on the table (as described in 1.2).
Take the remaining Map Cards, shuffle them, and set them facedown.
This will be the Map Deck.
2.2 Select Starting Powers
Remove the 27 Power Cards from the Action Deck and place them
face up in front of all players. Each player will start the game with
either:

• two Powers (in a 4 or 5 player game), or
• three Powers (in a 3 player game) of his choice.
DETERMINE SELECTION ORDER: Each player places one of his
control markers in a cup. One marker is drawn at random to determine who selects first. After that, selection goes around the table,
clockwise, one Power at a time, in “Reverse Draft” format. (That
means, in a 4-player game, choices will be made in the following
player order: 1-2-3-4 - 4-3-2-1; in a 3-player game it would be 1-2-3
- 3-2-1 - 1-2-3.)
SELECTION RESTRICTIONS: Players may select whichever Powers they wish, with the following restrictions:
• May not select a Power with a border mutual with the Power they
have previously selected, unless no other Power is available. For
example, a player may not select both Spain and the Almoravids
(who control Spain 3A).
• May not select one of the following six Powers—their map card is
not yet in play. Place these six cards to the side until the powers
selection process is complete.

Sweden
Polovtsy
Georgia

Prussia
The Cumans
The Bulgars

DISPLAY POWERS: The players take the Power Cards for each of
the Powers they have selected, displaying them, face up in front of
them.
PLAY NOTE: Obviously, some Powers are “better” than others. The
first time you play the game who is “better” will not be that clear. In
addition, some of the Powers have no, or partial, map sections at the
start. E.g., the Holy Roman Empire (HRE) starts without its “provinces” in 3B, 3C, 4B, and 1C.

2.3 Place Control Markers

Action Card

Players place their control markers in each of the provinces they control. They control all provinces of the Powers for which they have
cards and that have map sections in play.
EXAMPLE: If a player picked France he would place a control marker
on map card 2A and 2B. England controls the French province on 1B
(see below) and map card 1A is not yet in play.

Name of Event

AT START SITUATION: England controls the 1B province of France
at the start of the game. The Almoravids control Spain’s 3A province. (France and Spain, as Powers, are still controlled by the player
who chooses them initially and has the Power Card. If they are not so
chosen, the Control rules [4.3] apply.)

Instructions

Mandatory Card Symbol

2.4 Distribute At Start Income
The players now get money equal to the “Start” worth of each Power
for which they have a card, as stated on the Power card.

© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

4

Medieval

2.5 Prepare the Action Deck
The remaining Power cards are placed into the Action Deck, which
is now shuffled thoroughly and placed facedown on the table.

2.6 Deal Action Cards
Each player is now dealt four (4) Action Cards, which he holds in his
hand (unrevealed for now).

2.7 Determine Player Order
Each player places one of his control markers in a cup. One marker is
drawn at random to determine who goes first. Play continues clockwise around the table, with each player undertaking a Player Turn.
This player order is in effect until the end of the game.

3.0 General Course Of Play
3.1 Sequence of Play (The Player Turn)
A. Draw Action Cards. The player draws enough Action Cards so
that he has four cards in his hand to start his Player Turn. If he
already has four, he may not draw any.
CLARIFICATION: The basic maximum number of cards a player
may have in their hand is '4' at any time. The only exception to this is
that, as part of a deal, a player may acquire 1 card above the maximum (no more). However, that card must be played before that player's
next turn, otherwise he must discard (and he cannot discard a Power
card, etc) to meet the 4 Max for 3.1/A.
B. Map Card Selection. The player may, if he wishes, draw the top
card from the Map Deck. He must immediately place it into its
proper position on the Map Display. A player does not have to
draw a card from the Map Deck. If he does, his Actions are restricted in Phase D (Action Phase).
C. Mandatory Card Phase. The player must play all Mandatory
Cards he has drawn in “A”, see 3.2.
D. Action Phase. The player may undertake the following actions
in any order he wishes, subject to the limitations as written. Some
of the actions require payment of money. The player first decides
whether or not they are collecting income. If they decide to
collect income, they may not perform any other actions in the
Action Phase. If they do not decide to collect income, they may
perform the other actions in any order they wish.

PLAY NOTE: A player can always pass for his Action Phase, doing
nothing.

3.2 Action Cards
MANDATORY CARDS: Certain cards (Change of Ruler,
Mongols, and Disaster) must be played in the player turn
in which they were drawn—in the Mandatory Card Phase.
Play of a Mandatory Card in Phase C has no effect on
what the player may do in Phase D. If a player draws more than one
of these at the start of his Player Turn, the order in which he plays
them is up to him. Unfortunately, he does not get to replenish his
hand until his next turn.
NON-MANDATORY CARDS: Cards not marked as Mandatory may
be held in hand and played whenever the player feels like it at any
time during the Action Phase of their turn, with these exceptions.
This usually occurs during his turn. However, the Deus ex Machina
Card may be played at any time, the Assassin Card may be played to
stop cancel a Spies Card, a Spies card may be played to look at the
next Map Card prior to the decision to draw a Map Card, and a player
may commit a Knights of Christ Card against a Mongol attack.
Any cards that influence a die roll (such as cards that add to the combat die roll) must be played prior to the die roll.
DISCARDING: Non-Mandatory Cards may be discarded without
playing them, but only as part of a player’s Action Phase. However, a
Power Card may never be so discarded; it must be played or kept in
hand. As discarding cards is part of the Action Phase, players that
Collect Income may not so discard.

USED ACTION CARDS: Discarded and played Action Cards are
out of the game and are placed in a separate pile.
3.3 Map Cards
As part of his Action Phase, During the Map Card Selection Phase a
player may draw the top card from the face-down Map Deck. If he
draws a card from the Map Deck, he must put that map section into
play immediately afterwards. A player who chooses to draw and play
a Map Card:

• may not play a Pope Card during his Player Turn,
• may launch only one Attack during his Player Turn.

• Collect Income: Collect income from his provinces, as per 3.4.
The player also removes any Disaster markers from his Powers. If he Collects Income he may do nothing else; collecting
Income is his Action Phase.

Map Card

• Play Action Cards: Play, and resolve, as many Action Cards
as he wishes (and has). He may also discard as many cards as
he wishes, except for Power cards, which he can play or hold.
If he has undertaken Phase B, he may not play a Pope Card
(3.3).
• Launch Attacks: Launch one or two Attacks (**) against an
enemy Power/Province. If he has undertaken Phase B, he may
launch only one Attack.
When the player is finished, the turn passes to the player to his left,
and that player undertakes a Player Turn. This continues until the
game is over, see 3.5.
** = The term Attack includes attacking with your Powers, any
Knights of Christ Attack (7.1), or any attempt to end a Civil War
(8.3) or Heresy (8.5). Crusades do not count as an attack (6.2).

Income

Identity Code (2D)

Province Name

© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

Mongol Defense
Rating (+3)
If no rating, the card may not be
attacked by the Mongols (5.2).

The XIIIth Century in Europe

3.4 Collect Income
Players Collect Income for each province they control; they do not
have to control the Power to collect Fls from the province. Each Province of each Power provides a set Income. This is listed on the Power
Card and the Map Card. Thus, the player who controls France 1A
gets 2 Fls, 2A brings in 4 Fls, etc.
PLAY NOTE: As per 7.2, provinces controlled by Knights of Christ
get Fls only when a Pope card is played.
DISASTER: Collecting Income as an action removes Disaster markers (see 8.7) for all Powers controlled by that Player.
PROVINCE STATUS: Provinces with Civil War or Heresy provide
no income (see 8.3 & 8.5).

3.5 Length Of Game
The length of the game is determined by the Mongols.
• If the last Mongol Card has been played but there are still Action
Cards remaining for draw, when the next Power Card is drawn, the
game ends immediately upon drawing that card (which must be
revealed when drawn). There is no further “action”. If there are no
Power Cards left, play will continue until the last card is drawn
and that player’s turn completed.
• If the last Mongol Card (there are 7 Mongol Cards) is played, and
there are no Action Cards left to draw, after resolving that final
Mongol Card, the game is immediately over. There are no further
actions undertaken.
PLAY NOTE: In most (but not all) games, the end of the game will be
sudden and not easily determined.

Power Card
Name of Country
Religion (4.6)
Ruler Rating (4.5)
Starting Income (4.4)
Naval Strength (10.3)

5

4. POWERS AND CONTROL
4.1 Powers
There are 27 Powers in Medieval, each represented by a Power (Action) Card and a place on the map. Each Power Card indicates:
• the amount of Fls the Player gets who first gains Control of that
Power, see 4.3,
• the Income each of its Provinces provides,
• the Power’s Religious status: Catholic, Eastern Orthodox (both
Greek and Russian), Islam, or Pagan,
• the Army Strength,
• the Naval Capability (Navy); a “No” means it may never use Naval Transport,
• the Ruler at the start of the game, see 4.5.
PLAYING POWER CARDS: Power cards that are drawn as Action
cards may be held in hand for play as part of any subsequent Action
Phase. When a Power card is played it is placed in front of a player,
face up. Who it goes to is covered in 4.3.
PROVINCES: Some Powers contain one province (e.g., Hungary);
some powers are made up of more than one province (e.g., France).
A “province” is that part of a Power that is on a single Map Card.
Thus France’s presence on Card 1A is a province of France.
Exception: The Latin Kingdom has two, separate provinces on 3D:
Thrace and Armenia.
PLAY NOTE: Due to printing fluctuations, a province border may
creep onto a card. For game purposes, a power only has a province
on a card if the name of the power is on the card.
CLARIFICATIONS:
1. FRANCE: The northeastern French province that starts under
English control is treated as an English home province for all game
purposes until it comes under the control of the player who owns
the France power card, and the France power card is in play. At that
point it is treated as a French home province for the remainder of the
game.
2. SPAIN: The southern Spanish province that starts under
Almavorid control is treated as an Almavorid home province for all
game purposes until it comes under the control of the player who
owns the Spain power card, and the Spain power card is in play. At
that point it is treated as a Spanish home province for the remainder
of the game.

4.2 Provincial Control
Army Strength (9.1)
Province Income
Boxes provide a visual
reference to where the
power’s provinces are
located

Control of a province gives the player who is in Control:
• the Income (in Fls) from that province, as per 3.4, regardless of
which Power originally controlled it,
• possible Power control, as per 4.3.
Provincial control does not allow a player to Attack; only Power control does that. A player who controls a province, but not its Power,
may still Defend; see 9.0.

GAINING CONTROL: A player may gain control of a Province
by:

Religion Key
Eastern
Orthodox

Pagan

• starting the game in Control of that province. At the start of the
game a player controls all provinces of the Power he has chosen
for which there is a Map Card in play.

Catholic

Islam

EXAMPLE: A player starting the game controlling Russia would start
with control of Russian provinces 1D and 2C. However, as the cards
for 1E and 1F are not yet in play, that player does not control those
provinces, even though he controls Russia as a Power.
© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

6

Medieval

• placement of a new Map Card. If a new Map Card is brought
into play, and a player controls a Power (see 4.3) on that Map Card,
he immediately gains control of any newly revealed provinces of
that Power on the new Map Card.
EXAMPLE: Player “A” controls Russia, and another player draws
and plays Map Card 1E. Player “A” places his control marker in the
Russian 1E province, as he now controls that province.
• attacking that province and winning the “battle”, see 9.6.
Use the Control Markers to indicate Control of individual provinces.
Provinces without a Control Marker are not controlled by anyone.
Different players may control different provinces on the same card.
EXAMPLE: There are five provinces on card 1B. Each could be controlled by a different player.
SARDINIA AND CORSICA: The islands of Sardinia and Corsica
are considered a single, independent province. They are not a Power,
and they have no Card. They do provide 1 Fl Income to whoever
controls them, but they have no “base” Army or Naval capability, nor
may they raise Militia if attacked.
DESIGN NOTE: At the time the game chooses to start, they were not
“controlled” by any power other than themselves. They are not included as a separate Power for a variety of reasons known only to
the designer’s analyst…

4.3 Power Control
Control of a Power entitles the controlling player to use that Power’s
Army and Navy strength/capability.
PLAY NOTE: Control of a Power provides military capability; control of an individual province provides Fls. The two are sometimes
separate, in that Player A may control France as a Power, while
Player B controls France’s 1B province.
Control of a Power is always indicated by who has the Power Card.
If no one has the card for the Power, no one controls that Power, even
if all of its individual provinces are controlled.

Power Card is placed on the table as uncontrolled. It goes to whoever
satisfies “B” first.
When a player who has a Power card in front of him ends up controlling none of the provinces of that Power, he returns that card to the
table as uncontrolled. It likewise goes to whoever satisfies “B” first.
CLARIFICATIONS:
1. A power card that is either played by a player or acquired through
conquest by a player may be used by that player to attack in that turn,
providing the player still has an unused attack available.
2. Once played, a power card may never be traded or given to another
player.
4.4 Starting Income
Whenever a player gains control of a Power, that player also immediately receives the Start Income (in Fls) listed on the card, even if he
has collected income from its provinces before gaining Control of
the Power. This happens only when the card is first played.
PLAY NOTE: A player may keep a Power Card in his hand to stop
another player from controlling that Power, even as the latter controls all of that power’s provinces.

4.5 Ruler Ratings
Ruler ratings are applied when conducting land battles (9.3), Crusades (6.2), and fighting Civil Wars (8.3). Powers have (or get) a
Ruler who is either Normal (no DRM Effect), exceptionally Good
(+1 “value”), or dismally Bad (–1 “value”). The Ruler with whom a
Power starts the game is listed on the Power Card.
RULER MARKERS: Rulers may be changed by losing a Civil War
(8.3), by play of an Assassin (8.2) or a Change of Ruler event (8.8).
When a ruler changes from the type stated on the Power Card, use a
Ruler marker to indicate its new rating.
RULER CHANGE: If a ruler change is required, roll one die and
consult the Leader Table. The result is the ruler’s new rating.

Leader Table

When a Power Card is played, Control of that Power immediately
goes to:

(one die)

A. The player who drew the card, providing there is at least one of
that Power’s uncontrolled province in play. The drawing player
places the Power Card in front of him, to indicate his Control, and
places Control Markers in all of that Power’s uncontrolled provinces.
EXAMPLE: Player “A” draws and plays the Power card for Serbia.
Player ”B” controls the Serbian 3C province, but Serbia 2C is not
controlled by anyone. Player “A”, therefore, gains Control of Serbia,
places a control marker in its 2C province, and collects the “Start
Fls” for Serbia (as per 4.4).
B. The player who controls all of that Power’s provinces that are in
play. The Power Card is given to that player, who places the Power
Card in front of him to indicate his Control.
EXAMPLE: Player “A” plays the Latin Kingdom Power Card. Map
Cards 3D and 4D are in play, and player “A” controls the Latin
provinces on those cards. Map Card 3C is not in play, so the lack of
control of the Latin province on 3C is not an issue in determining
who gets the Power card, which goes to player “A”… who now collects the “Start Fls” for the Latin Kingdom.
C. If all provinces in play are controlled by different players, the

DR

Result

1-2

Good Ruler

3-4

Normal Ruler

5-6

Bad Ruler

4.6 Religion
Each card list the Power’s religion. Below is a summary of the Religion rules found in the game:
• Only a Catholic Power may use a Knights of Christ card (7.0).
• Knights of Christ may only attack Pagan provinces unless attacking from the Kingdom of Jerusalem, Cyprus, Rhodes, or Malta
(7.1).
• Only a Catholic Power may go on a Crusade (6.2).
• Only a Catholic Power may be excommunicated (6.3).
• Only a Catholic Power may be married by the Pope (6.4).
• Only a Catholic Power may move through or into the Papal States
via play of a Pope Card (6.5).
• Only a Catholic Power may suffer Heresy (8.5).
• Only an Islamic Power may use the Jihad card (8.4).
• Only Catholic and Eastern Orthodox provinces may be the target
of a Jihad (8.4).

© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

•

The XIIIth Century in Europe

7

CLARIFICATION: The religion of a province is always defined by
its power card for all game purposes. The sole exception here is that
a Knights of Christ power is always Catholic, regardless of the religion of the power card for the Knights of Christ province.

EXAMPLE: A Mongol victory on 2F would remove that card. However, all three Powers with a presence on that card—The Bulgars,
Polovtsy, and Georgia, have provinces remaining in play, so their
Power cards would not be affected.

5. THE MONGOLS

Important: Once a Map Card is destroyed, no unplayed Map Card
that would be displayed east of that card may be used; that Map Card
is, de facto, also out of play.

5.1 The Mongols Arrive
There is no Mongol player; the Mongols arrive as mandatory Action Cards. The first three
Mongol Cards that are played are treated as
No Event. They are simply set aside. However, when the third Mongol Card is played,
all three, previously played Mongol Cards are
now shuffled back into the Action Deck. From
this moment on, any played Mongol Card is
resolved per 5.2.

EXAMPLE: If 1F has not yet been played, and 1E is destroyed, 1F is
also out of the game.
No Player gets any credit of any sort for Mongol victories.
PLAY NOTE: The three “F” Map Cards act as buffers to the Mongols.
Players thinking about drawing a Map Card Play during their turn
should take this into consideration.
5.4 Length of Game

Mongols determine the length of the game as described in 3.5

5.2 The Mongols Destroy
The Mongols are played by the player who drew the card. He must
use them to attack any one Map Card on the easternmost edge of
(what remains of) the map, his choice. That attack is resolved immediately, before undertaking anything else that turn. Using the Mongols
is not an “Attack”.

6. POPE CARDS
6.1 Pope Cards in General
There are 12 Action Cards in Medieval that
say “Pope”. A player holds Pope Cards in his
hand and plays them during his Action Phase.
A player may play as many Pope cards per
turn as he has and wishes.

The term easternmost refers to any in play Map Card that makes up
the eastern edge of the visible map, and whose entire eastern side of
the card is exposed.
EXAMPLE: When all map cards are in play, 4D is not an easternmost edge card, because 3F covers part of its eastern edge. If 3F
were to be destroyed/removed by the Mongols, or was not in play, 4D
(and 3D) would both be easternmost edge cards.
ATTACK PROCEDURE: To resolve a Mongol attack against a Map
Card, the player who played the Mongol Card rolls one die for the
Mongols; the player to his left rolls one die for the defending “Map
Card” (see Mongol Defense Rating below), and the battle is resolved
as per 9.6. The only possible DRM—other than the Mongol Attack
Strength and Mongol Defense Rating—is use of a Knights of Christ
Card (see 7.3). Militia or Rulers are not used.
MONGOL ATTACK STRENGTH: The Mongol Attack Strength is
always a plus five (+5) DRM.
MONGOL DEFENSE RATING: The Mongol Defensive Strength of
each Map Card (that could possibly be a defender) is noted on the
Map Card. If a Map Card does not have a Mongol Defense Rating,
the card may not be attacked by the Mongols.
DESIGN AND HISTORICAL NOTE: The Mongols had no naval capabilities, and it is our opinion that the heavily forested areas of
Central Europe would have been a considerable barrier to Mongol
expansion. We have rated 1C, 2C and 3C accordingly. Map cards
with an A or B are “Mongol-proof”.

5.3 Map Card Destruction
Mongol attacks are resolved as per 9.6. If the Mongols lose, there is
no effect other than Nothing Happens. If the Mongols win, the Map
Card is destroyed. Remove it from the map (or cover it with a Mongol Card, whichever visual effect you prefer); it is no longer in play.
All Power Cards affected by such Destruction are also set aside, no
longer in play.
A tie result is treated as a Mongol victory!

HISTORICAL NOTE: Each Pope Card carries the name (but not the “number”) of one
of the Popes of the 13th century.
EFFECTS: The play of a Pope Card allows
the player to do one (1) of the following:
•
•
•
•
•

Call for a Crusade once per turn, see 6.2,
Excommunicate any one Catholic Power, see 6.3,
Remove Excommunication, at a cost of 3 Fls, see 6.3,
Arrange a Marriage, see 6.4,
Allow Passage through the Papal States, see 6.5.

Important: Playing a Pope Card causes Knights of Christ provinces
to get income, see 7.2.
Note: a player who chooses to Collect Income, or to draw a Map
Card, as (part of) his Player Turn may not play a Pope Card that turn.

6.2 The Call To Crusade
HISTORICAL NOTE: The period covered by the game saw lots of
Crusades, not all truly religious in basis. These included the Spanish
Reconquista, all sorts of Crusades in the Baltic (mostly of a Teutonic
expansion mind set), the Albigensian Crusade (southern France), Italy
(mostly in southern Italy, mostly political), Byzantium, Egypt, Tunisia, and several other minor events. Crusading was a fairly popular
pastime. Our game version is far too generic and abstract to represent the complexities of this fascinating era.
CRUSADE DECLARATION: When playing a Pope Card, a player
may declare a Crusade, one per turn, regardless of the number of
Pope Cards played in that player’s turn. There is no specific target.
Regardless of whether or not they join the Crusade, each player who
controls at least one province of a Catholic Power must pay the player
who played the Pope card (the Pope player) 1 Fl (in a 4 or 5 player
game), or 2 Fls (in a 3 player game) when a Crusade is declared. If he
cannot pay; he cannot go on Crusade and—in addition—the player

© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

8

Medieval

playing the Pope card may immediately Excommunicate any one
Catholic Power of that player.
PLAY NOTE: Essentially, calling for a Crusade is a way for the player
so doing to get money, which is not that far from the historical reality…
CRUSADE FORMATION: Each player, including the player playing the Pope card, may now commit one (1) of his controlled Catholic Powers to the Crusade. Committed Powers with Rulers must use
their Ruler Capability Rating (Good, Normal, or Bad). The total of
the committed Powers’ Army strength (with possible Ruler adjustments) is the “Attack Strength” for that Crusade.
Knights of Christ (see 7.0) may be included in one of two forms:
• Any Knights of Christ that control a province may be treated by
the owning player as a “Catholic Power” (see above),
• A player may play a Knights of Christ card in support of his Committed Power, see 7.1.
An excommunicated Power that is committed to a Crusade has the
excommunication immediately removed. However, a Power under
Civil War or Disaster may not go on Crusade.
The “Defense Strength” of the (abstract) targeted infidel or heretic is
determined after players have committed Powers. It is the sum of
two dice. Thus a dice roll of ‘4’ and ‘2’ would give the Infidel/Heretics a Defensive Army Strength of ‘6’.
CRUSADE RESOLUTION: The Crusader Attack is resolved by comparing the Crusader’s Attack Strength to the Infidel’s (dice roll produced) Defense Strength. If the Crusaders’ total is higher than that of
the infidel/heretic, each player who committed at least one Power
receives Fls equal to the difference. If the Crusaders’ total is the same
as or lower than that of the infidel/heretic, no one gets anything (except for the Pope player, who got the Start Up Fee; see above).
PLAY NOTE: The Crusaders do not roll any dice; the only dice roll
is for determining the infidel’s Defense Strength.
EXAMPLE OF A CRUSADE: Player A declares a Crusade. Players
B, C, and D each control at least one Catholic Power, so they each
give Player A 1 Fl. Player A commits an Excommunicated France
(Army Strength +2, with a Good Ruler, +1); Player B commits The
Latin Kingdom (Army Strength +1); Player C commits Hungary (Army
Strength +1); Player D commits Sweden, which has an Army Strength
of ‘0’, but, by committing Sweden, he is eligible for the “winner’s
payoff”. The Crusader Attack strength is 5.
One player rolls for the Infidel’s Defense Strength, getting a ‘6’ (a ‘4’
and a ‘2’).
The Infidel dice roll is higher than the Crusaders’ Attack Strength, so
no one gets any more Fls. The Crusade is over. (Do not feel bad;
most of the Crusades were a losing affair… as we said, the only real
winner was the Papal coffers…)
In addition, France is no longer excommunicated.

6.3 Excommunication
A player may use a Pope Card to Excommunicate any
Catholic Power. No reason is needed. In addition, if a
player cannot go on Crusade because he cannot pay, the
player playing the Pope card may immediately Excommunicate any one Catholic Power of that player, see 6.2. When Excommunicated, place an Excommunicated Marker atop that Power’s
Card.
EFFECTS:
• An Excommunicated Power may not trace movement passage
through any province of any other Catholic Power—even one he
controls! This does not apply to Naval Areas, and he may always
trace movement passage “into” (as opposed to “through”).
• Excommunicated Powers are subject to possible play of a Civil
War Card in a later Player Turn, see 8.3.
REMOVAL: Excommunication may be removed by the affected
Power/player by:
• Going On Crusade, when that opportunity is available. If an Excommunicated Power joins a Crusade, it is immediately no longer
excommunicated.
• Playing a Pope Card and paying 3 Fls to remove the Excommunication from any one Catholic player of your choice (including yourself one of your own).
• At the instant he is declared Excommunicate, the Player may immediately strike a deal with the player playing the Pope card—for
whatever terms they agree upon that are not strictly forbidden—to
cancel the Excommunication. Once the Pope’s turn is over, that
opportunity has passed.

6.4 Marriage
By playing a Pope Card a player may gain uninterrupted passage
(see 9.5) for any one of his Catholic Powers through the provinces of
any one other Catholic Power… and vice versa! Such passage has
been granted as part of a marriage between the ruling houses of both
Powers. The Marriage—and the uninterrupted passage—last until
either Power has a Change of Rulers, at which point the marriage no
longer exists and the passage capability is removed. Use the Marriage/Passage Markers to indicate who gets the passage.
A Catholic power may attack a home province of another Catholic
power with which it has a Marriage. Such an attack cancels the Marriage after it is resolved.

6.5 The Papal States
The Patrimony of the Pope—the Papal States in central Italy—lies
athwart passage by land from northern Europe into southern Italy,
the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies (Holy Roman Empire territory).
No player may ever control the Papal States.
No Power may move through or into the Papal States, unless that
Power is Catholic and the player plays a Pope Card, allowing passage through the Papal States for that Player Turn.

Once the Crusade is resolved, the player whose turn it is may continue his Player Turn. The Crusade is not considered an Attack for
purposes of 3.1 [D]. However, a Power that has gone on Crusade that
Player Turn may not be used to Attack. Using the above example,
player A could not use France to Attack that Player-Turn, as she has
already been on Crusade.

© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

The XIIIth Century in Europe

7. KNIGHTS OF CHRIST
7.1 Uses of Knights of Christ Action
Cards
The Knights of Christ Cards represent the
Military Orders of the era, such as the Templars, the Hospitallers and the Teutonic
Knights.

9

A. If any Power on the target map card is Catholic, and the player
controlling that Power has a Knights of Christ Card, he may play
that card as a +2 DRM for the Defense Strength of the Map Card.
B. If there is a Knights of Christ-controlled province on a Mongol-attacked Map Card, increase the Mongol Defensive Strength
by one (+1), regardless of the number of Knights of Christ provinces on that card.

AS SUPPORT: A Knights of Christ Card (or
Cards) may be used as Support. After such
use, the card is discarded. To support:
•
it may be played by a Catholic Power
that is On Crusade to add to the Crusaders’ Army Strength;
• it may be played by a Catholic Power who is being attacked by a
Pagan Power, an Islamic Power, or the Mongols. The Knights of
Christ Army rating is added to the Defensive Strength of the Catholic Power for that combat.
AS A POWER: A Knights of Christ Card (or Cards) may be used as
if it were a Power, to gain Control:
• It may be played in an attempt to gain control of any one Pagan
province on map. The Pagan provinces are: Prussia, Latvia, Livonia, the Bulgars, Polovtsy, and The Cumans.
• It may be played by a player in an attempt to gain control of any
one province from the Kingdom of Jerusalem, Cyprus, Rhodes, or
Malta.
• As a Power on Crusade, as per 6.2.
MILITIA: Milita may never be purchased to support Knights of Christ.
When played to gain Control, no Passage is traced. The Knights simply attack the targeted province. When attacking solely with Knights
of Christ, there is no 1 Fl cost to Attack.
If the Knights win, the player gains control of that province, and just
that province. Place a Knights of Christ Control Marker in that province, along with the player’s own color control marker.

7.2 Knights of Christ Provinces
A Knights of Christ controlled province is a separate mini-Power
(Catholic), and no longer part of the Power it originally belonged to.
It may only defend; it may never attack. It is eligible to go On Crusade, though, as a Power. It uses the Army rating of the Knights of
Christ card. A Knights of Christ province is considered Catholic for all
game purposes unless and until it is conquered again, in which case it
reverts to its normal status.
INCOME: The owning player gets the province’s Fls whenever a
Pope Card is played, regardless who plays it! It does not provide
income during an Income Collection Action.
If the Knights of Christ controlled province is a “Power” (e.g.,
Lithuania), and that Power card appears, the player who jointly controls that Knights of Christ province gets the card, as per 4.3.
RULERS: Knights of Christ do not have Rulers. A Knights of Christ
province has no ruler, and is not subject to Disaster, Change of Ruler,
Heresy or Civil War. If a roll on the Powers Table indicates a Knights
of Christ power, roll again.
RESTRICTION: One Knights of Christ cannot attack another Knights
of Christ, under any circumstances.

7.3 Knights of Christ and the Mongols

EXAMPLE: The Mongols attack Map Card 1E which has a Knights
of Christ province (Polovtsy). The Mongol’s Attack Strength is 5, the
card’s Defensive strength, 3+1=4. The Mongols roll a 3 (+5 = 8), a
4 is rolled for the Map Card (+4 = 8). The Mongols win.

8. ADDITIONAL ACTION
CARDS
8.1 Spies
Play of a Spies Card allows a player to do one
of the following (but see 8.2):
• Look at the in-hand cards of any one player
(without revealing them to the other players); or
• Look at the next Map Card eligible to be
drawn (without revealing same to the other
players). CLARIFICATION: When Spies
is played to view the next Map Card, it is
played in phase B prior to the decision to draw a Map Card. This
play of Spies DOES NOT affect the ability of the player to take
income, as it does not occur in the Action Phase.
• Look at the next two Action cards available for draw (without revealing same to the other players and returning them to the draw
pile in the same order), or
• When played prior to resolving an Attack, the player against whom
it is played must reveal how much Militia he has raised (see 9.2
and 9.6). The player who played the Spies Card may now change
his Militia allotment.
CLARIFICATION: When played for the purpose of revealing the purchased Milita for a battle, Spies cards are handled in the following
order:
a. Both players secretly allocate florins for Milita per battle rules.
b. Defender plays Spies card or declines to do so .
c. If defender plays Spies card, both sides reveal Milita florins and
defender may then change their florin allocation.
d. If defender DOES NOT play a Spies card, attacker may play a
Spies card.
e. If attacker plays Spies card, both sides reveal Milita florins and
attacker may then change their florin allocation.

Knights of Christ Cards are useful against the Mongols:
© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

10

Medieval
Income, that province has Heresy. The player places a Heresy
Marker in the province.
• If the die roll is the same as or lower than the province’s Income
(in Fl), nothing has happened.

8.2 Assassins
A player may play an Assassin Card out of
turn—during another player’s turn—to negate
the latter’s use of a Spies Card, see 8.1. Such
play costs nothing and negates the effect of
the Spies Card.

EFFECTS: Provinces with Heresy provide No Income.
REMOVAL: Heresy may be removed by the player controlling that
province declaring an Attack on the Heretics as one of his allowed
Attacks (see 3.1 [D]) in his Player Turn. The declaration of such an
Attack does not result in any combat; it automatically removes the
Heresy without any die rolling. However, it counts as one of his Attacks for his Player Turn.

A player, in his Action Phase, may play an
Assassin Card to attempt to force a Ruler
Change for any Power with a Ruler, even his
own!
To attempt a Ruler Assassination, roll one die:
• If the die roll is a 5-6, you have succeeded; that Ruler is dead and
his Player must roll for a Ruler Change, see 4.5.
• If the die roll is a 1-4, the assassin has failed in his attempt. There
is no further penalty.

8.3 Civil War
A Player may play a Civil War Card against
any Power that started his turn either Excommunicated or with a Disaster Marker. Place a
Civil War Marker on that Power’s Card.

8.6 Deus Ex Machina
This card may be played at any time during
the game. It cancels the play of any other card,
other than the ones listed below, if played before that card’s action is resolved. Cards it does
not affect:
• Pope Card
• Mongol Card
• Knights of Christ Card

PLAY NOTE: The “Started his turn” means
you cannot play a Disaster Card, followed by
a Civil War Card against the same Power in
the same Player Turn.

8.7 Disaster
When a Disaster Events Card is played, that
player consults the Powers Table and rolls two
dice to determine which Power Disaster has
struck. If a rolled for Power is not yet controlled by anyone, roll until you get one that
is. If that Power already has a Disaster Marker,
roll again. Place a Disaster Marker on top of
the Power Card.

EFFECTS: A Power with Civil War may:
• not Attack any other province,
• not Collect Income,
• not Go On Crusade,
• lose its Ruler (see below).
REMOVAL: A Civil War Marker may be removed by a player “attacking” his own Power. This is considered an “Attack” for purposes
of 3.1 [D]. The “Civil War” is the defender; it has an Army DRM of
‘0’. The Power is the attacker, and attacks using the standard attack
rules, as if it were attacking another power, see 9.6.
If the Power wins, remove the Civil War Marker. If the Power loses
(or ties), the Civil War remains in effect, but the Power must undergo
a Ruler Change, see 4.5. Either way, that Power may not Attack again
that turn.

EFFECTS: Disaster has the following effects:
• The Power is now susceptible to Civil War,
see 8.3.
• The player controlling the affected Power loses Fls. Roll one die,
the result is the amount of Fls he loses. If the die roll is greater than
the amount of Fls he has left, he pays what he has—and the Power
goes into Civil War! (The dangers of deficit spending…)
REMOVAL: Remove all Disaster markers as part of Income Collection, see 3.4.

A Power that has Civil War retains that status
until it is removed, as above, regardless of who
gains Control of it.

DESIGN NOTE: The generic term “Disaster” covers Drought, Famine, Plague, and general serf-level civilian unhappiness, of which
there was much in this era.

8.4 Jihad

8.8 Change Ruler

A player may use this card when attacking
with an Islamic Power, against a Catholic or
Eastern Orthodox Power/province. It reduces
the cost of adding Militia (see 9.2) to the
Attacker’s Army Strength —never to a
Defender’s— from 3 Fls per DRM, to 2 Fls
per DRM. Each Jihad card may only be used
for one attack.

Whenever a Change Ruler Events Card is played, roll two dice, reading them consecutively, red die first. (E.g., a red ‘5’ and a white ‘3’ is
a ‘53’). Consult the Powers Table to see which Power has a Ruler
Change. If that Power is not controlled by any player —no one has
the card—roll again until you get one that is. Once the Power has
been determined, that Power’s player rolls one die, consulting the
Leader Table, to see what level of new Ruler that Power now has,
placing the appropriate Ruler Marker atop that Power Card.

8.5 Heresy

EXAMPLE: A player plays a Ruler Change Event. He rolls a 56 on
the Powers Table, which means France, who at the time has a Good
Ruler. France gets a new Ruler. He now rolls a ‘4’, which means
France now has a Normal Ruler.

When this card is played, Heresy may have
risen it’s head. The player targets a Catholic
province that is controlled by a Catholic Power
and rolls one die:
• If the die roll is higher than the province’s

© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

The XIIIth Century in Europe

9. ATTACK
Attack is an action undertaken during a Player’s Turn. The object is
to gain Control of a province, remove a Civil War, or drive out Heresy. There are no combat pieces, and there is no actual movement.

9.1 Base Army Strength
Every Power has a Base Army Strength—think of it as the Power’s
standing army. The Base Army Strength is used as a DRM for resolving battles. Thus, a +1, means that that Power has a Base Army
Strength DRM of +1, regardless of whether it is attacking or defending. The Defender may only use his Base Army Strength if he controls the Power Card associated with the province under attack.
EXAMPLE: Player “A” uses Russia to attack a province of Poland.
Poland belongs to Player “B” but that player has only recently conquered that province and does not possess the Power Card for it. So
the Base Army Strength of the Polish province is 0.
EXCEPTIONS: England and the Almoravids can use their Base Army
Strength to defend the foreign provinces they control at the start of
the game (the 1B province of France and the 3A province of Spain,
respectively).
UNCONTROLLED PROVINCES: If the target province is uncontrolled, treat it as having a Base Army Strength of “0”.

11

or your own province suffering Heresy (8.5). Both of these Attacks
cost 1 Fl and count against the Attack Limit (see below).
ATTACK LIMIT: A player may launch one or two Attacks per Player
Turn, as per 3.1 [D]. However, no Power may launch more than one
Attack per turn.
EXAMPLE: France cannot attack twice in one turn.
9.5 Passage
To “reach” a target province the player must be able to (theoretically) move through all intervening provinces/seas until he reaches
the target. There is no actual movement of pieces (as there are no
pieces to move). The player traces a path of movement from any one
province of his attacking Power through all provinces/Naval Areas
between him and the target.
EXAMPLE: For France to attack Russia’s 2C province, it can “move’’
through Holy Roman Empire 2B, into and through Holy Roman Empire 2C, into and through Poland 2C, thence into Russia 2C for the
attack. That is not the only path; just one possibility. (And see below
for the naval possibilities.)
PLAY NOTE: A player may never trace movement through a map
card not in play.
A Power may pass, without obstruction:

9.2 Militia
A player may, when needed, increase his Power’s Army Strength by
raising Militia. For each 3 Fls spent that power receives an additional
+1 DRM (for use in that land battle). Thus, spending 9 Fls will bring
a +3 DRM. Powers with a ‘0’ base Army Strength may raise Militia.
Militia are used only for the land battle for which they are raised.

• through any provinces its player controls,
• through any uncontrolled provinces,
• through the provinces of any Power with which it has a Marriage,
see 6.4,
• through the Papal States by play of a Pope Card, see 6.5,
• through any province by Permission, see below.

NOTE: Knights of Christ may not raise Militia (7.1).

PLAY NOTE: See 10.0 for using Naval Areas to move.

9.3 Rulers In Battle
A Power’s Ruler’s capability modifier must be applied to every land
battle that Power is involved in during that Ruler’s reign. Rulers are
not used in Mongol Attacks (5.2) or Sea Battles (10.3).

PERMISSION: To pass through a province that another player Controls, without playing a Marriage Card, etc., the “moving” player
must get Permission from the controlling Player. He does that in one
of two ways:

RULERS IN DEFENSE: The Defender may only use a Ruler in defense if he controls the Power Card associated with the province under attack. For example, even though Player A used Russia to conquer a Polish province, Player A cannot use Russia’s Leader when
defending the Polish province. Only the Polish Ruler can defend a
Polish province and a player would need to control Poland’s Power
Card to use the Polish Ruler.

• the player controlling the pass-through province simply says, Okay;
• the player controlling the pass-through province makes a deal. Usually the deal involves payment of Fls, but it may involve anything
not strictly forbidden by the rules. (E.g., you may transfer control
of a Power, a Province, Cards, etc.).

NO POWER CARD IN PLAY: If an uncontrolled province is attacked
(the Power Card is not yet in play) the Leader Rating of the defending province is considered Normal.

9.4 Attacking
Attacking another player’s—or an uncontrolled—province is an action during a Player’s Action Phase by the player on behalf of one of
his Powers to gain control of the target province. It may be attempted
any time during that phase, but an Attack must be declared—and
announced—against a specific Province. It costs a player 1 Fl each
time he Attacks (except for an attack that uses only the Knights of
Christ; see 7.0). The province to be attacked must be announced prior
to resolving the Attack. If, for any reason (usually lack of Passage;
see 9.5), the targeted province cannot be reached the Attack does not
take place, although it is counted as one of that player’s allowed Attacks for that turn and the 1 Fl attack cost is forfeited.
NOTE: You may also attack your own Power during a Civil War (8.3)

Players may not renege once they give their Permission to pass
through a province.
9.6 Battle Resolution
STEP 1: The attacking and the defending players secretly determine
how much Militia each is going to raise by placing the Florins needed
in a closed fist.
STEP 2: The attacking and the defending players each roll 1 die.
STEP 3: To that die roll each adds (or subtracts), cumulatively, the
following:
•
•
•
•
•

His Base Army Strength (9.1)
Any Militia raised (9.2), reveal Florins at this time,
Any Ruler Capability Rating (9.3)
A Knights of Christ card (defender only); see 7.1.
Mercenaries (attacker only); see 11.0.

STEP 4: High total wins. Winner gains (or retains) control of the
province. If the total is even (tie), the Defender retains control.

© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

12

Medieval

RESTRICTIONS:
• Only one Power may Attack, and only one province may be targeted.
• Each Power may attack only once per turn (9.4).
• Players may not combine Powers.

France pays the above costs each time.
Most Naval Areas have more than one Power with coastal provinces
that could, if they wished, intercept another Power’s passage by sea.
When determining who gets to intercept passage first, the rule is:
• Island provinces (e.g., Crete, Cyprus) get first shot, regardless of
rating,
• Coastal provinces’ opportunity arises based on their Navy Rating.
Highest Rating gets first choice. In case of ties, roll one die to
resolve, high roller may intercept passage first.

10. NAVAL RULES
10.1 Naval Transport Capability (NTC)
Many (but not all) Powers have Naval Transport Capability (and the
War Galley Fleet power to back it up). A Power Card that says “Navy
= No” does not have this capability. (A “Navy = 0” means it does, but
has no base Navy DRM.)
EXAMPLE: France has a base Naval capability of +1; the Kingdom
of Jerusalem has Naval Capability, but a rating of “0”; Poland has
No Naval Capability, at all.
Naval capability is what a player uses to escort his Armies at sea
(using Naval Areas for passage), or to intercept/stop another player’s
naval passage. A Power with NTC can use that capability to trace
Movement Passage (as per 9.5) through the Naval Area on a given
Map Card until it reaches a province chosen by the moving player, at
which point it may not use NTC any more. All subsequent movement
tracing must be on land from there.
CLARIFICATIONS:
1. Naval Transport Capacity may only be used once in tracing Movement Passage for a given attack. This one use may occur at any point
in the tracing of Movement Passage.

EXAMPLE: Byzantium seeks to attack and seize the Mameluke province in 4D. The Byzantine player decides to use his Naval capability
to transport his army, as his land passage would be blocked. On his
3D card, the first opportunity to intercept and stop passage goes to
the Venetians, who control Rhodes. After that, opportunity would go
to either the Seljuks or the Latins (both +1, so a die roll decides),
with the Kingdom of Jerusalem getting last shot, if any. If the fleet is
still moving, entering 4D, first opportunity goes to the Latins, for
Cyprus. After that, the Mamelukes (with a +1) come next, with the
Jerusalites getting last shot.
10.3 Naval Battles
Naval Battles are resolved using the same method as for land (see
9.6), except that Rulers have no effect, Mercenaries may not be used,
and additional Naval DRM cost 4 Fls per +1. The “moving” player
must determine his added (purchased) DRM before starting to move,
and it applies throughout the entire voyage.
If the “moving” Power wins, it continues to move. If he loses, passage is denied. Any Fls spent on Army or Naval DRM are lost.

2. A single use of Naval Transport Capability may pass through Naval Areas on more than one Map Card, so long as those Naval Areas
are all connected by sea.

Ties go to the player with the higher base Navy Strength (on the
card). If those ratings are equal, the moving player wins. (That is the
opposite of Land Combat).

EXAMPLE: The Selijuks of Rum may use NTC to trace from their
home province on 3D to the Bulgaria province on 2D, and could then
trace Movement Passage by land to attack the Polish province on
2C. However, they could not use NTC as described above, then trace
by land to Prussia followed by NTC to Sweden as only one use of
NTC is allowed when tracing for any given attack.

NTC may not be used to gain control. It is used solely to “transport”
armies that are attempting to gain control.

PLAY NOTE: Movement may be traced from 2A into 3A (around the
western edge of Spain).
EXAMPLE: England wishes to Attack and seize Sardinia/Corsica.
As it has NTC, it may trace movement from Naval Area 1A, through
Naval Area 2A, into 3A (as per the note, above), and thence into 3B,
at which point her army may land and attack Sardinia (or simply
enter and gain Control). That is, if no one stops her.
PLAY NOTE: You will notice that Powers with NTC can avoid the
blockage problems of Passage by Land…if unopposed.
10.2 Naval Interception
Naval Transport may be intercepted and stopped by any Power with
NTC whose controlled province borders the Naval Area in question.
Any such attempt to stop Naval Movement results in a Naval Battle.
An attempt to Intercept costs the intercepting player 1 Fl, in addition
to any additional DRM he wishes to buy, as per 10.3. That cost applies to any one Power’s attempted Naval Transport through any one
Sea Area (card). If there is a possibility of interception on more than
one card, the cost to intercept must be paid anew.
EXAMPLE: England is transporting troops to Spain. France may
attempt interception in both/either 1A or 2A. If it does so in both,

10.4 Naval Areas
A “Naval Area” is a contiguous sea section of a map card. If a given
map card contains two or more sea areas that are totally separated from
each other on that card by land provinces, each is a “Naval Area”
(for example, on card 2B there are two naval areas. One is off the
southern coast of France, and the other is off of the coast of Venice).

11. MERCENARIES
Two Pagan Powers—the Cumans and the
Polovtsians—if controlled by the moving
player may be used to provide Mercenaries, as
support for the main Attacking army, in a land
attack on any province in an adjoining Map
Card that is not separated by a Naval Area.
The Prussian and Livonian pagans may not
be so used.
EFFECTS: When used, Mercenaries use their
Army rating as a die roll modifier. There is no
cost to use Mercenaries, but they may only be
used in an attack; never in defense. The Mercenaries do not have to trace movement, they
just have to be from a province/power in the
same or adjacent Map Card that is not separated by a Naval Area.

© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

The XIIIth Century in Europe
EXAMPLE: The Cumans may be used in an Attack on any province
in 1D, 1E, 2F, 2C, or the province of Thrace in 3D. They could not be
used against Byzantium or Trebizond, as they are separated by a Naval
Area. They could not be used against 3C or 3F, which are not adjacent (they are caddy-corner).
Mercenaries may be used in only one Attack per Player Turn.

12. VICTORY CONDITIONS
When the game is over (see 3.5), the winner is determined. The winner is the player with the most Victory Points (VPs). VPs are determined solely by control of provinces/powers at the end of the game.
They do not accumulate from turn to turn.
A player earns VPs equal to the Income Value of each Province he
controls, including those controlled jointly by the Knights of Christ.
If he controls all provinces of a multi-province Power (e.g., France,
but not Hungary), he adds 1 VP to his total.
MARKERS: Civil War, Heresy, Excommunication, Disaster—have
no effect on Victory.

TOURNAMENT RULES

13. TRADING AND GIVING
13.1 Trading and Giving
A. Players may trade or give the following items to each other:
florins, un-played non-mandatory cards, access through their territory and provinces they control but do not have the corresponding
power card in play for.
B. Provinces belonging to a player who owns the corresponding in
play power card may never be traded or given, nor may power cards
that are in play.
C. A player may only trade, give or receive a total of one card during
their turn. To keep track of this card, keep it to the side with a control
marker of the player it was acquired from until it is played/traded/
given. That card may not be traded/given back to that player until the
receiving player's next turn.
D. Trading/giving may be discussed freely by players, providing the
active player is not prevented in any way from performing their turn.
E. At least one of the players in a trading/giving situation MUST be
the active player. The active player MUST refill their hand to 4 cards
before any trading/giving occurs.
F. In addition to deals involving permission to pass through territory,
players may not renege on trades involving tradable items once agreed
to. Trades involving promises to take actions are not enforceable.
EXAMPLE: Player A offers Player B 5 FL for a Spies card. If Player
B agrees, the trade MUST be done. However, if Player A had offered
Player B 5 FL for his promise to play a Pope card for Crusade,
Player B is not bound (by anything but honor) to play the card as
agreed.

13

Notes on Powers
The Almoravids: Muslim Power that controls all of western Africa
(that is in the game) and what is left of the Islamic presence in
Europe, now limited to her control of southern Spain (3A, which
includes the Balearic Islands). She has provinces on 3A, 3B, and
4B.
The Ayyubids/Mamelukes: The game covers the end of the Ayyubid
dynasty in Egypt (which is why they start with a “Bad” Ruler), and
the birth of the powerful Mamelukes. She has provinces on 4C, 4D
and 3F, as we have treated Baghdad as part of this Power. (This is
not truly accurate, but it works for game purposes.)
Bulgaria: A country rich in promise, controlling, as it does, the approaches to the Middle East from Central Europe, but low in ability
at this point. Thus, divided thricely, into 2C, 2D and 3C.
The Bulgars: “Nowhere Men in a Nowhere Land”, they have two
provinces: 1F and 2F, and not much else going for them. Buffer zone
against the Mongols, for the most part.
Byzantium: Pushed out of Europe, and Constantinople, by the Fourth
Crusade in 1204, Byzantium was in major disarray, her power
fractionlized between her main base in Nicea (3D) and her precarious toehold in the Balkans (Epirus; 3C). Like a cat, though, it has
many lives left to live.
The Cumans: The Mercenaries of choice in Eastern Europe. Less a
country than a restless tribe. One province, on 2D.
Denmark: Two provinces, 1B and 1C, the latter including Malmo
and the island between Malmo and mainland Denmark.
England: England has provinces on 1A and 1B. She also starts the
game in control of the French province on 1B, last remnants of the
Plantagenet empire. (To be more accurate, England still controlled
Aquitaine (2A), but for game purposes that proved a bit too much for
the poor French player.) The “Bad Ruler” represents King John.
France: A really interesting Power to play. Four connected provinces - 1A, 1B, 2A and 2B - of which one (1B) is held by England at
the start of the game. However, she starts off with a Good Ruler (Philip
II). A strong, rich, but difficult Power to play, as she stands between
at least two other major Powers.
Georgia: Two provinces, Caucasia on 2F and Azerdjibain on 3F.
Despite what you see on the map cards, Georgia has no game presence on 2D in terms of Control or income. However, she may Land
Passage Move directly into the Cuman territory from 2F without going through The Bulgars.
Holy Roman Empire (HRE): Potentially, the strongest Power in
the game, but split all over the place, with many of its provinces not
available at the start of the game. (This reflects, albeit generically,
the internal troubles the HRE was having, as well as problems over
who was Top Gun in Euroland vis a vis The Pope.) Her provinces
include 1B, 1C, 2B and 2C, which represent the Germanic portion of
the empire, plus 3B, 3C and 4B, which represent the Kingdom of the
Two Sicilies, of which the island of Malta is a separate province.
Hungary: Finally emerging as a strong Balkan power after the destruction of the Magyars in 955, she has one province (2C). Her singularity, income, and position makes her an interesting “secondary”
Power to play.
Kingdom of Jerusalem: Or what is left of the old Crusaders. Two,
separate provinces, 3D (Antioch) and 4D (Jerusalem).

© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

14

Medieval

Latin Kingdom: Far-spread, and organizationally weak, alliance of
several “duchies” in the eastern Mediterranean, a recent outgrowth
of their capture of Constantinople. Much internal dissension, power
grabs, and change of borders during this era. They have four separate
provinces on three maps: Macedonia/Greece (3C), Cyprus (4D), and
Thrace and Armenia on 3D. The two latter provinces are treated separately in terms of providing income and control of the entire Power.
Lithuania: A not inconsequential pagan province (1D) with territorial ambitions in the Baltic, subject of much attention from both Russia (Novgorod) and the Teutonic Knights.
Livonia: Pagan Baltic wilderness, one of the homes of the Teutonic
Knights burgeoning “empire” of this era. And subject of much effort
by Alexander Nevsky to expand from Novgorod.
Norway: Two Provinces, on 1B and 1C. Spent much of her gameera efforts launching Crusades into the Baltic and annoying Denmark.
Poland: Much like it was historically, split and fractionlized in the
game into three separate provinces: 1C, 1D and 2C. Destined for
better things, but not in the era covered by this game.
Polovtsy: Pagans, and historical enemies of the Russians. (And made
permanently famous by Borodin and his Polovtsian Dances…). This
is one of the areas of the map that is a victim of the Enigma system.
It has three provinces: 1E, 2D and 2F. Not the best Power in the
game.

CREDITS
Game Design: Richard Berg
Developement: Uli Blennemann
Playtesting: Dirk Dahmann, Elke Dahmann, Carl
Hotchkiss, Mark Kaczmarek, Marion Lischka, Christoph
Ludwig, Harri Pelkkala, Vinnie Walsh
Art Director, Cover Art and Package Design: Rodger B.
MacGowan

Counter Art: Craig Grando
Card Art: Craig Grando
Rules Layout and Editing: Mark Simonitch
Proofreader: Kevin Duke, Steve Carey
Production Coordination: Tony Curtis
Producers: Gene Billingsley, Tony Curtis, Andy Lewis, and
Rodger B. MacGowan
Map System based on mechanics designed by Evan Jones
Living Rules by Joel Tamburo and Mark Simonitch

Prussia: Pagan Baltic wilderness, one of the homes of the Teutonic
Knights burgeoning “empire” of this era.
Russia: Not really an intact country at this time - more a loose collection of power bases - with Novogorod and Moscow vying for being Top Bear, Kiev falling into disrepair. She has provinces in 1D,
1E, 1F and 2C. Lots of income, but her “position”, in game terms, is
not the greatest.
Sardinia/Corsica: Not a Power, but an independent Province. Thus,
no Card. But worth 1 Fl Income to He Who Controls.
The Seljuks of Rum: The Turkish branch of Islam these days, they
have one large province on 3D and a smaller on 3F. The Seljuks will,
eventually, morph into the Ottomans.
Serbia: A two province (2C and 3C) Balkan upstart, and a not-sominor player in the endless Balkan 13th century game of Musical
Chairs.
Spain: The Reconquista is in full swing. The Almoravids have been
pushed out of most of Central Spain (2A), and the drive to retake
southern Spain (3A) is in full gear. The Aragonese are on the brink of
their expansion eastward into the Mediterranean (as far as Athens!).
Sweden: One Province, on 1C, and eastward ambitions.
Trebizond: More a financial entity than anything else, a very rich
trading province with almost no military capability. She relied on the
kindness of non-strangers to exist.

Answering Rules Questions
Should any questions concerning play arise, we will gladly answer them. Please follow the guidelines printed below to expedite the process and assure a response:
• Please refer to the numbered rules section(s) applicable to each
question.
• Mail your questions and a self-addressed stamped envelope
to GMT Games at the address listed on page 2.
For those on the Internet, we can be reached as follows:

BergBROG@aol.com (the designer)
UBlennemann@aol.com (the developer)
gmtgames@aol.com (the publisher)
For ongoing online support of this game, visit our website at
www.gmtgames.com.
We can also be found, along with most of the rest of the GMT
designers/developers, on Consimworld’s discussion boards, at
www.consimworld.com. We heartily recommend this site to anyone interested in wargaming.

Venice: “Serenissima”, the great naval power of the era, has 5 widespread provinces: Venice (2B), Istria (2C) (these two are separated
by the HRE), Crete (4C), Rhodes (3D) and the Aegean Islands of 3C
(mostly the Euboea-Andros-Naxos islands and Lemnos, which are
all treated as one province).

© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

The XIIIth Century in Europe

Example of Play (3-Player Game)
Prepare to Play
POWER SELECTION. Each of the three players will select three Power
Cards, one in each selection round. The number in parenthesis below is
the starting income for the Power.
ROUND 1: Player A picks The Holy Roman Empire (6), Player B takes
France (6), Player C takes England (9).
ROUND 2: Player C takes Spain (4), Player B takes Russia (7). and
Player A takes Ayyubids/Mamluks (4).
ROUND 3: Player A takes the Almoravids (6), Player B takes Byzantium (3), and Player C takes Hungary (5).
Note that all players were careful not to select a Power that was adjacent to a power they had already selected. Note that the Almoravids are
not considered adjacent to the Ayyubids/Mamluks since Map Cards 4B
and 4C are not yet in play.
PLACE CONTROL MARKERS: Each player now places his three Power
Cards in front of him and places control markers in each province he
controls (see diagram below). Note that The Almoravids control Southern Spain at start and England controls the French province on card 1B
at start.

15

Deal Action Cards
The remaining Power cards are shuffled back into the deck—this combination of unused Power cards and Action cards is called the Action Deck.
Each player is dealt 4 cards from this deck and these cards are kept secret, in hand, until played. See diagram on the next page to view each
player’s hand. The eleven unused map cards are set face down and comprise the Map Deck.
Turn 1
DRAW ACTION CARDS: Player A wins the draw and so goes first. He
has 4 Action cards in his hand (the maximum allowed) so skips this
segment.
DRAW MAP CARD: Player A draws a map card.
It is 1F which is at the far right of the play field.
Map cards must be played immediately, so it is
placed on the table. Player B places one of his
control markers in the Russian province (he controls Russia). Drawing a map card will limit
Player A to one attack in his Action Phase but
this will not be a problem as we shall soon see.

B

STARTING INCOME: Player A with The Holy Roman Empire, The
Almoravids, and The Ayyubids/Mamlukes starts with 16 florins. Player
B with France, Russia and Byzantium starts with 16 florins. Player C
with England, Spain and Hungary starts with 18 florins.

MANDATORY CARD PHASE: Player A has
only one Mandatory card (Change of Ruler) and
plays it first. He consults The Powers Table and rolls two dice. A result
of 25 is Prussia, but that power is not in play yet, so he rolls again. A
result of 46 is Hungary which is in play. He rolls one die on the Leader
Table and gets a 4—Normal Ruler. Hungary is currently a Bad Ruler so
Player C gladly upgrades his ruler.

STARTING RULERS: Each Power’s ruler is stated on the card and so
Ruler markers are not necessary at this time.

ACTION PHASE: Player A has the Cumans Power card in his hand but
their map card is not yet in play. He’s got a Pope card but a Crusade,

1F
To be played by
Player A

C
1C
To be played by
Player B

C

B

A
B

B

A

B

A
C

C
A
B
A

A
© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

16

Medieval
Player A

Player B

Marriage or Excommunication at this time would have little value. He
also has a Jihad card which his two Islamic Powers (The Almoravids
and Ayyubids/Mamluks) can use. Player A decides to conserve his florins and Action Cards and Collects Income as his only action this turn
(3.4). He gets another 16 florins, putting him in great shape to defend
against any possible attacks by the other two players.

Player C

DRAW ACTION CARDS: Since Player C used his Assassin card in Player
B’s turn he may draw one additional card from the Action Deck to bring
his hand back up to 4 cards. He Draws a Jihad card.
MANDATORY CARD PHASE: Player C has no Mandatory cards so
this phase is skipped.
ACTION PHASE: Player C performs the following Actions:

Player B

• Plays his Poland Power card and places control markers in the three
Polish provinces (cards 1C, 1D and 2C). He also receives Poland’s 2
starting florins.

MAP CARD: Player B does not plan to attack
more than once so draws a card from the top of
the Map Deck, it is 1C. The card is placed on
the table and Player A places one of his control
markers in his Holy Roman Empire province.
No other Powers on that card are in play.
MANDATORY CARD PHASE: Player B has
two Mandatory cards so plays them first. The
A
first card is a Mongol card which has no effect—the first three Mongol cards are treated as No Event (5.1). The
second mandatory card is a Disaster. He rolls two dice and consults The
Powers Table. A result of 51 results in a Disaster in Spain. Player A
places a Disaster marker on his Spanish Power Card. The Disaster requires Player A to immediately roll one die and lose that many florins
(8.7). He rolls a 2 and removes two florins. The Disaster marker also
makes Spain susceptible to Civil War (8.3).
ACTION PHASE: Player B cannot play his Civil War card because no
Power in play started the turn with a Disaster marker.
Player B now launches an Attack from France on the English controlled
French province on card 1B. Player B pays 1 florin to do so. Player B
(France) secretly gathers 12 florins for the battle and Player C (England)
gathers 9 florins. Every 3 florins spent generates a +1 Militia modifier.
Player B then plays his Spies card against C and ask to reveal the amount
of florins committed to Militia. Instead of revealing his florins, Player C
counters with his Assassin card which cancels the Spies card. Both players now reveal their florins at the same time. France’s total DRMs for
the battle is 7 (+4 Militia, + 2 Base Army Strength, +1 Good Ruler).
England’s total DRM is 3 (+3 Militia, +1 Base Army Strength, –1 Ruler).
Both players roll a die. France’s modified die roll is higher than England’s
so France wins the battle and conquers the province. Player B places his
control marker in the French province.
Player B is now finished with his turn (because he drew a map card he is
allowed only one attack).
Player C
MAP CARD: Player C would like to get map card 1A into play but declines to draw a map card because he is planning to make two attacks in
this turn.

• Plays Heresy against the French province on card 1B (payback time).
He rolls a 3 which is higher than the provinces’ income value so a Heresy marker is placed in the province. That province will provide no income until the marker is removed (8.5).
• Still fuming from his defeat with the French army he plays his Assassin
card against the ruler of France. He rolls a 6 which allows a change of
ruler die roll. He then rolls another 6 for a Bad Ruler.
• He now conducts his two attacks. The first is against Serbia from Hungary. He spends 1 florin for the attack and 3 florins to give the Hungarian army a +1 Militia DRM. Hungary’s ruler is Bad for a –1 DRM. Since
nobody controls the Serbian province and the Serbia Power card is not
yet in play, it is considered to have a Base Army Strength of 0 and a
Normal Ruler. Either Player A or B can roll for Serbia. Both countries
roll a 3 which results in the defender retaining control of Serbia. That
attack is over with.
• Player C next considers using Spain to attack the Almoravids in southern Spain. The Spanish Army is a +2 and has a Good Ruler (+1) but
player A has 30 florins to pour into Militia DRMs. Since a failed attack
only would cost a single florin he decides to attack in hopes of making
Player A overspend in florins. Sure enough, Player A commits 12 florins
for Militia while Player C commits none. Player C (Spain) rolls a 4 which
becomes a 7 due to his army (+2) and leader (+1) DRMs. Player A
(Almoravids) rolls a 2 which becomes a 6 due to his army (+1), leader
(–1) and Militia (+4) DRMs. He loses the battle and Player C now controls southern Spain.
• Player C holds on to his Knights of Christ card which will provide a +2
DRM in defense if the Almoravids decide to counterattack in Spain.
• Player C has no Islamic powers so discards his Jihad card.
SUMMARY: Turn 1 ends with Player A with 18 florins, Player B with 3
florins and Player C with 6 florins. The Action is heating up, no Mongols
are in sight, and all players still have an equal chance at winning.

GMT GAMES
P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
www.GMTGames.com

© GMT Games — February 1, 2004

