R ULE BOOK
1.0	
2.0	
3.0	
4.0	
5.0	
6.0	
7.0	
8.0	
9.0	

Introduction............................................................. 	2
Game Map.............................................................. 	2
Unit Counters.......................................................... 	4
Victory Points & Ending the Game........................ 	6
Setting up the Game................................................ 	7
Pre-war Sequence................................................... 	8
Sequence of Play..................................................... 	8
Strategy Cards......................................................... 	9
Land Movement...................................................... 	11

10.0	 Land Combat.......................................................... 	12
11.0	 Naval Movement & Lake Control.......................... 	15
12.0	 Naval Combat......................................................... 	17
13.0	 Supply..................................................................... 	18
14.0	 Reinforcements....................................................... 	19
15.0	 Building & Repair of Naval Units.......................... 	19
16.0	 Winter Turns........................................................... 	20
17.0	 Victory Levels/Instant Victory................................ 	21
Glossary........................................................................... 	22

GMT Games, LLC • P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
www.GMTGames.com

2

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

1.0 Introduction
Mr. Madison’s War (That Incredible War of 1812) is a simulation
game that depicts the war on the northern frontier of the United
States and Canada. From the European perspective it was an
off shoot of the Napoleonic Wars that were waged from 1796
to 1815. It is a two player game with players taking the forces
of either the United States or Great Britain.

2.0 Game Map
The playing surface depicts the provinces of Upper and Lower
Canada where a great many of the battles of the War of 1812
took place. The states of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio and
Michigan territory where US forces were mustered for the
invasion of Canada are also depicted.

2.1 Map Spaces
The squares, here after called “spaces”, depict the various
hamlets, towns, cities and forts that existed at the time of the
war. They have been positioned to channel movement based
on the historical movement of troops and generally follow well
established routes along water shed basins.
2.11 Forest Spaces: If the space is green this indicates
that the area is sparsely settled and mainly forested.
Forest spaces offer advantages to units defending them,
but offer disadvantages to units defending or attacking against
Indians (10.41).
2.12 Clear Spaces: The light tan spaces represent clear
areas and offer advantages to British Regular units in
defense in 1812 & 1813 (10.44).
2.13 Lakeside Towns: Some town spaces have a
“water” symbol located in them and this indicates that
the town is adjacent to a navigable river or lake. Lakeside towns can be the target of an Amphibious Attack detailed
in 11.5.

2.14 Montreal: Any unit attacking the city automatically incurs a –1 DRM in the first round of combat.
This is in addition to any other combat modifier that
may apply.
2.15 Naval Bases: Naval Bases are located in lakeside
towns with an “anchor” symbol. Naval Bases are important for ship construction and repair (15.0).
2.16 Reinforcement Spaces: The spaces marked with
an “R” are reinforcement spaces where new units are
introduced onto the map. These are also Supply
Sources (13.2). The British only have one reinforcement
space—the city of Quebec. The US have four reinforcement
spaces—Ft. MacArthur, Mansfield, Pittsburgh and Albany.
2.17 Winter Quartering Value: Every space on the map has
a number inside the box that indicates the number of units that
may winter in that space without penalty (16.2). This number
is also the Victory Point value of the space (4.13).
2.18 Territory: All spaces on the map with a blue number are
in United States territory and those with a red number are in
British territory. Territories never change sides but spaces in a
territory can be controlled by enemy forces (4.14).

2.2 Paths
2.21 Major Roads: The dark black lines on the map
indicate major arteries of transportation, and units can
move further and faster on them. It costs 1 Movement Point
(MP) to move along a Major Road space.
DESIGN NOTE: Major roads were often located adjacent
to navigable rivers and troops utilized bateaux or other river
transportation, especially for baggage.
2.22 Trails: Trails depicted on the map were particularly subject to weather conditions and were slower than
regular roads. It costs 2 MP’s to move along Trail spaces.
DESIGN NOTE: Roads in Upper and Lower Canada were
still primitive by modern standards. The road network does
not always represent movement exclusively by roads.

Game Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in these rules:
CRT: Combat Results Table
DOW: Declaration of War
DRM: Die Roll Modifier
Ft.: Fort
MP: Movement Point
NBV: Naval Build Value
OPV: Operational Point Value
US: United States
VP: Victory Point
WQ: Winter Quartering

“Oswego” for example, is a town located adjacent to Lake
Ontario, and thus can be reached by naval units. Queenston is
not a lakeside town and therefore no naval units can move there.

2.23 Major Invasion Routes: These are shown with
double sided light blue arrows. These represent difficult
crossings at major rivers and cost 3 MPs to cross. An attacker
crossing a Major Invasion Route and attacking the space directly on the other side incurs a –1 DRM in the first round of
combat.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

3

2.3 Head of Navigation

2.7 Forts

The head of navigation is indicated by five white diamond
symbols located on rivers adjacent to the last town that
naval vessels on the lake could move to. Vessels can only move
to spaces that are indicated as lakeside towns on the same lake
or river.

2.71 Defensive Benefits: The forts depicted on the
map increase the defense value of that space by the
number indicated in the lower left. Forts can also
increase the “quality” of defending units by using the
fort’s rating (A, B, or C class) instead of the unit(s) class during combat (Exception, 2.76). A defending unit’s class is always
increased by a fort, but is never required to lower its class
(Exception 10.32 [case 4]). The benefits of defending in a fort
space lasts for all combat rounds.

EXAMPLE: Ogdensburg is a lakeside town that can be
reached from Lake Ontario, but no vessel can move east of
the town as indicated by the Head of Navigation marks.
Note also that on the Richelieu River the towns of St-Jean
and Isle aux Noix can be reached from Lake Champlain. The
Niagara River connecting Lake Ontario to Lake Erie is not
navigable at all, and is indicated by a Head of Navigation mark
in the middle of the river. No naval unit on Lake Ontario may
ever enter Lake Erie or vice versa.

2.4 Lake Control Boxes
Lake Control Boxes are used to indicate control
of the lake and the space where all naval battles
occur. Whichever side controls the box also
controls the lake. Naval battles can occur only in a Lake Control Box—not in a lakeside town. Control of a lake earns the
player 2 VPs (11.4).

2.5 Lake Transit Box
Naval movement between Lake Erie and Lake
Huron is only possible through the Lake Transit
Box. Units moving from this box can enter either
a lakeside town or a Lake Control Box. It costs 2
MPs to enter the Lake Transit Box. Land and/or
naval units can never end their turn in the Lake Transit Box.

2.6 Lake Huron and Lake Erie
For the purpose of the Mutual Fleet Return Phase and for naval
units that are forced to retreat, Lake Huron and Lake Erie are
considered the same lake. If a naval vessel or fleet is forced to
retreat for any reason it can retreat to any lakeside town on Lake
Erie or Lake Huron. Naval units on Lake Huron must retreat to
a friendly lakeside town on Lake Huron first if one is available.

Component List
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

One 22" x 34" Map
Two Counter Sheets
One Combat Results Table Card
One Reference Card
Two British Set Up Cards
Two American Set Up Cards
110 Strategy Cards
Two Six-sided Dice
One Rules Book
One Play Book

EXAMPLES: A single “B” class unit, defending on a “C”
class fort, defends with its B” class status. A single “C”
class militia unit defending on a “B” class fort is considered a “B” class for the entire combat.
2.72 When attacking a fort, the terrain in the space is ignored,
but Major Invasion Routes and Amphibious Landing modifiers
are still are in effect for the first round of combat.
2.73 Kingston and Sackets Harbour: The forts at
Kingston and Sackets Harbour do not exist in the first
half of 1812 and have no effect on play. These forts
are automatically constructed in the second half of
1812, and are marked with two green dots as a reminder.
2.74 Event Card Forts: There are several forts
that can only be introduced into the game by the
play of specific Event cards. In addition, these forts
increase the Winter Quartering Value of the space
by 4 as specified on the counter. They do not change the Victory Point values of the space.
2.75 Forts never take a step loss and can never defend without
land units present. A fort with no friendly units automatically
falls to any enemy land combat unit (not leader) that occupies
the space.
2.76 If only Indian units commence the Action Phase in a fort
space, the fort’s class and increased value is completely ignored.
Indians defending with other units do get the benefit of the fort
even if the other units are eliminated in the same combat round.
2.77 The “9” result on the Land Combat Results Table specifically applies to the defense of a fort, in which case the combat
ends and the attacker retreats. If the combat does not occur in
a fort space, the defender retreats normally (if possible).
2.78 If an enemy unit captures a fort, the enemy unit has all of
the defensive benefits of the fort, including the Winter Quartering Value.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

4

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

3.0 Unit Counters
The main pieces of the game are the infantry battalions that
fought in the war. Field artillery in North America was only a
supplementary arm at that time and not the deciding factor in
battles. Mounted units were almost unknown on the Canadian
front but the few that participated have been included.

3.2 Naval Units
The naval units represent the ships that plied the waters of the
Great Lakes during the war, and their names are located at the
bottom centre of the counter.
3.21 Types: The types of ships included in the game are frigates,
corvettes, brigantines (brigs), and sloops/schooners. For game
purposes there is no difference between a sloop and a schooner.

3.1 Land Units
3.11 Types: Infantry units are classified into three main types—
Regulars, Militia, and Native American warriors. For game
purposes we will refer to the latter as “Indians” since that is
how they were referred to during the war.
•	 Regulars: For game purposes Regulars can be distinguished by the fact that their class rating is always “A” or
“B”. Indian units are not considered Regulars.
•	 Militia: Every militia unit in the game is “C” class except
the 5th PA (a “B” class unit).
•	 Indians: See 3.7 for a summary of all rules regarding
Indians.

3.22 Quality: There are no combat values assigned to ships, it
is the quality of the vessel and its type that determines its combat prowess. The lake vessels have their class rating indicated
in the upper right corner of the counter and the type of vessel
indicated at the top center.
•	 “A” class represents vessels at the height of efficiency and
combat readiness.
•	 “B” class represents vessels that were designed specifically
for war but are not up to the efficiency of an elite vessel.
•	 “C” class represents older inefficient vessels or former
merchant vessels that had been converted for war and were
not really suitable in a line of battle.

3.12 Class: Land units are also classified by class, with class
“A” being the highest. Class is used in combat for the Lead
Unit DRM (10.3). There are only two Regular “C” class units
in the game, the 2-factor Regular Detachment at Detroit, and
the 1-factor US Detachment at Fort Mackinaw at the game start.

3.23 Colored Dots: Unlike land units, the colored dots on naval
units indicate the turn in which they can be constructed. All
vessels, both British and US, must be constructed no earlier
than their turn of entry, or later, in order to enter the game.

3.13 Combat Strength: The number in the lower left of the
counter indicates the Combat Strength and is generally related
to the number of men in the unit, and its ability to inflict and
absorb casualties.
3.14 Detachments: Units with a Combat Strength of 1 or 2 are
considered Detachments. Detachment size is important for the
Tecumseh rule (3.53).
3.15 Colored Dots: The colored dot(s) on a units are used in
setting up the game and to aid in sorting the various counters.
A single green dot ( ) indicates a unit arriving in the first half
of 1812; a yellow dot ( ) indicates 1813 and a red dot ( ) indicates 1814. Double dots (e.g., ) indicate units arriving in the
second half of the year.
3.16 Movement Factors: This is not printed on the counters,
but all land units have a Movement Factor of 6 spaces, except
the Dragoon units which have a movement of 10 spaces.
3.17 Reduced Side: Most units are double-sided so that when
they take casualties they are flipped to their reduced strength
side. Some units do not have a reduced strength side, and if
required to take a step loss are eliminated. These are indicated
by no picture on the back and a single dot used to aid in set up.
EXAMPLE: Detachments, and Indian units are examples of
units that cannot be reduced (the Shawnee unit is an exception).

3.24 Naval Movement Factors: The Movement Factor of lake
vessels and naval leaders is 6.

3.3 Leaders
Command Value
Seniority
Name

Combat Modifier
Colored Dot

3.31 How to Read Leader Units: Leaders have the following
values on their counter:
•	 Command Value: This value represents the minimum
OPV value of the card played in order to activate him. A
“1” leader is easier to activate than a “3” leader.
•	 Combat Modifier: The number added to the die roll
whenever a leader is attacking. The number is subtracted
from the die roll whenever a leader is defending.
•	 Rank: Leader seniority (3.35), and also an indication of
how many units the leader may move (3.33). A naval leader
shows an anchor symbol ( ) in lieu of a rank star.
•	 Colored Dot: See 3.15.
•	 Name: The leader’s historical last name

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book
3.32 Activating Leaders: Activating leaders is a more efficient way of moving units on the map, as opposed to moving
individual units. See 8.4 and 8.5.
3.33 Command Limits: The number of stars on a leader counter
indicates his seniority and how many units he may command.
The most senior leader has three stars.
-star leader may command up to 15 units

5

3.37 Arrival of Naval Leaders: For the first half of 1812 there
are no naval leaders present on the map. Naval leaders arrive
on the map according to a preset reinforcement schedule. Naval
leaders are permanently assigned to the lake on which they
arrive. Perry and Barclay can move vessels on Lake Erie and
Lake Huron only. All other naval leaders can only move vessels
on the lake to which they are assigned.

3.4 Replacement Leaders

-star leader may command up to 10 units

3.41 Brock: If Brock is killed by the Event card
D eath of B rock he is flipped over to the Roger
Sheaffe side and this commander replaces
Brock.

-star leader may command up to 5 units
EXAMPLE: Leader Brock who has a rank of two stars ( )
is able to move 10 units when activated.
Naval leaders can command an unlimited number of vessels
on the lake that they are deployed on.
3.34 Movement Factors: Land leaders have a Movement Factor of 10. Naval leaders have a Movement Factor of 6.
3.35 Rank: If two leaders are in the same space, only one
leader’s combat modifier may be used, and this must be the
senior leader if present, even if this combat modifier is inferior
to a junior leader’s. If the leaders are equal in rank, the owning
player may choose which one to command. In land combat, all
land leaders outrank a naval leader (Exception, Amphibious Attacks, 11.5). A higher ranked leader is allowed to move a lower
or equally ranked leader as he moves, but does not activate the
other leader in the sense that the other leader may activate other
units and move independently.
EXAMPLE: In the case of an Amphibious Attack where naval leader Chauncey activated land units, General Brown
could move with the units for the attack and use his combat
ability for the attack. This is an exception to the strict seniority rule because it is essentially a naval operation. Chauncey
activates the naval units that carry the land units and General Brown is attached.
3.36 Land Leaders in Naval Situations: Land leaders can
activate naval units for the purpose of naval transport and
amphibious attacks, but they cannot engage in naval combat
under any circumstance. Land leaders can activate any number
of naval vessels that begin in the same space as the leader. This
is in addition to any land units that this leader could normally
activate for movement. All leaders, except Tecumseh, can be
used to activate units for a lake transport or amphibious move.
EXAMPLE: If General Brown was at Sackets Harbour with
several naval and land units he could be activated to move
land units to another lakeside town if the naval units he has
have the capacity to carry them. The British player cannot
be in control of the lake in order to be able to do this.

3.42 Perry, Chauncey, Yeo or Barclay Leaders:
If Perry, Chauncey, Yeo or Barclay is ever captured
they are immediately flipped over to their “replacement” side and placed at any friendly lakeside
town. If no friendly lake side town exists they are kept off map
until one becomes available.

3.5 Leader Tecumseh
3.51 Tecumseh is subordinate to every British
leader in the game. If stacked with another British
leader he cannot use his combat rating (Exception:
Card #9 Brock and Tecumseh).
3.52 Tecumseh can only use his combat rating if there is at least
one Indian unit in the space.
3.53 Tecumseh can activate and move any number of Indian
units, however these units still must obey all the rules of regular
movement. He can also activate and command a single British
Regular unit of Detachment size (“1” or “2” strength) in battle.
Exception: He may not command the Dragoon unit.
3.54 If either the “Tecumseh” or “Shawnee” unit is removed
from the map, then the other unit is removed regardless of its
location on the map.

3.6 Special Units
Some units have special abilities or limitations that override
normal game rules, or are introduced into the game only through
the play of a card.
3.61 The Northwest Company/Indian Unit: This
unit has the ability to move freely from Ft. Mackinac and Ft. St. Joseph without the use of a naval
unit to carry them. The unit has a double wavy line
code on the counter to remind players of this ability. The Northwest Company/Indian unit can only operate on Lake Huron,
and is only useful to garrison or attack the forts on that particular lake. The unit cannot enter the Lake Control Box and
therefore cannot be used for lake control.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

6

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

3.62 Dragoons: These units have a
Movement Factor of 10. They cannot
be transported by lake transport, engage in amphibious attacks, nor retreat
by water. If used in an attack against a fort they are considered
to be “B” class units. The assumption is the unit fights dismounted. In defense of a fort they can be considered “A” class.
The Dragoon unit cannot be activated by “Tecumseh”.
3.63 The Lower Canada Militia Unit: The unit
is designated LC on the counter. It may never
voluntarily move further than two spaces from the
city of Montreal. That is to say, no further west
than Cornwall, and no further south than Johnson’s. It may not
enter US territory.
3.64 As illustrated, some units have a special symbol or code
to indicate an event is needed for their arrival.
EXAMPLE: The Mohawk 2B unit has “CE”
on the unit indicating that its presence in the
game can only occur through the play of a
specific card. In this case Card #56 Grand
River Indians.

4.0 Victory Points & Ending the Game
4.1 Victory Points
4.11 General Rule: Each player will attempt to win the game
by accumulating Victory Points (VPs) through the control of
enemy spaces, controlling the Great Lakes, and/or through the
play of historic Event cards.
4.12 Tracking VPs: VPs are noted and
tracked at the instant they occur. Players mark their points by moving the
Victory Point marker on the Victory
Point Track located on the map map. The British-flag side of
the marker is used if the British are ahead in points and the US
side if they are ahead.
4.13 Awarding VPs: VPs are awarded if friendly
units occupy and remain in control of enemy towns
that have a Victory Point value. Note, that some
cards can cause a town to be destroyed, and as a
result, become a “0” VP space which last for the entire game.
4.14 Controlling a Town: In order to control a town, the Combat Factor of the occupying unit(s) must be equal to or greater
than the VP/WQ value of the town. When a player no longer
controls the town he instantly loses the VPs for that space. If
a unit occupying an enemy town is not of sufficient size for
control, the unit has no effect on the space at all. It does not
score Victory Points, it does not cut the supply line, it does not
deny naval construction at the space, nor does it cut off the
retreat of friendly units.
4.15 Indian Units and Control: Indian units by themselves
can only control spaces valued at “1” or less. This supersedes
the standard definition of “Control” found in 4.14. However,
Indian units can add their combat value to other units in order
to fulfill the control requirements.
4.16 Lake VPs: A player receives 2 VPs for each Lake Control
Box he controls. This is awarded instantly, in the same way that
all other VPs are awarded.

3.7 Summary Rules Involving Indians
•	 If alone, cannot use Forts (2.76)
•	 Have a Movement Factor of 6 (3.16)
•	 Cannot be Restored (8.31, case 5)
•	 Cannot board naval vessels (11.33) or use Naval Retreat
(9.47)
•	 Provide a combat modifier when defending or attacking
Regular or Militia units in woods (10.41)
•	 If not accompanied by non-Indians, can only block Supply
Paths in spaces with a VP value of 0 or 1 (13.34)

EXAMPLE: The VP marker was at “0” and the British
player had scored 2 VPs for taking control of Lake Ontario,
the marker is flipped to the British side and placed on the
“2” space. If in a subsequent turn, the American player took
control of Lake Ontario from the British, the marker would
move down two spaces to “0”, (because the British player
had lost control) and the marker is now flipped to the American side and moved to the “2” space.
DESIGN NOTE: Lake Control effectively results in a four
point swing when one side takes control from another player.
One player loses two points and the other player gains two
points.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book
4.17 Event Card VPs: Victory Points are also awarded for
the play of specific Event cards. Those Event cards that award
VPs detail the amount of points scored on the card. There is
a place on the map to place cards that have been utilized for
VPs. This can be useful as a check to keep the Victory Point
marker up to date.
4.18 Yearly VP Check: At the end of each year, the Victory
Point total should be verified by checking the enemy towns
that are garrisoned by friendly forces, and checking the points
awarded for specific cards played.

4.2 Ending the Game
4.21 Final victory in the game is only assessed after the Treaty
of Ghent or the Battle of New Orleans card have been played
as events, or if all cards by both players have been expended
after the last turn of 1814. (It’s possible that those two special
cards may not come into play at all.)
4.22 Treaty of Ghent: When the Treaty of Ghent card is
played, the game ends immediately, and no further cards can
be played (Exception: Battle of New Orleans card, 4.23). The
player who played the card must subtract a number of VPs equal
to the number of cards remaining in his hand. If it is the last
card played in a player’s hand, no VPs are lost.
EXAMPLE: It is the final round in 1814 and the British
player has 3 cards left including the Treaty of Ghent card.
If he played the Treaty of Ghent card immediately, the game
would end, but he would have to subtract 2 VPs since this
is the number of cards remaining in his hand. A player may
want to end the war early if he has a comfortable lead in
VPs.
4.23 Battle of New Orleans Event: The only card that can be
played after the Treaty of Ghent, is the Battle of New Orleans
card. In this case it must either be played as an event, or be
discarded. If played for the event, the Battle of New Orleans
is a winter card and must have been held as per rule 7.35. For
all practical purposes as an event, it is the last card that can
be played in the game. If the Treaty of Ghent card does not
appear at all, the US player may still play The Battle of New
Orleans card as a regular operations card or play it as the event
under the conditions of rule 7.34. In this instance however it
must be his last card play of the game.
DESIGN NOTE: Should the US player be fortunate enough
to get both Treaty of Ghent and Battle of New Orleans cards
he has to recognize the limitations and advantages of having
both cards. Battle of New Orleans cannot be played as an
operations card after the Treaty of Ghent card is played.
It can only be played for the event if held, because it is a
Winter event. The US player would have to think about using
this card in advance before his play of the Treaty of Ghent.

7

4.3 End of Game VP Penalties
4.31 General Rule: No additional VPs are earned when the
game ends, but some VPs can be lost due to supply situations
as listed below.
4.32 Out of Supply Units: At the end of the game (only), if a
unit is cut off from its supply line, no VPs can be awarded for
that unit. This will discourage a-historical moves from occurring on the last turn of the game.
4.33 Lake Control: A player will lose the 2 VPs for Lake
Control if his vessels occupying the box do not have a friendly
lakeside town that is also in supply to which they could move to.
4.34 Lake Huron: If at the end of the game the British are
in control of Lake Huron, US units at Ft. Mackinac or Ft.
St. Joseph (if the US player had captured it) would be out of
supply, and thus not eligible to retain the VPs. If neither side
is in control of Lake Huron both sides are considered to be in
supply. If the US player is in control of Lake Huron the British
player is still in supply.
DESIGN NOTE: This anomalous situation exists because
by 1814 the British had alternate routes of supply to York via
the Nottawasaga and/or the Ottawa River.

5.0 Setting up the Game
5.1 General Rule
The player taking the US forces sits at the south edge of the
map and the British player sits at the north edge. Both players
place their units on the map in accordance with the British and
American Set Up cards. The Victory Point marker is set at “0”
and the Turn Record marker is not placed on the map until after
the Pre-war Sequence (Section 6.0).

5.2 Separate Decks
The Strategy cards are separated into three individual decks.
For convenience the backs of the cards are sorted by color.
After separation, the players should have a green 1812 deck,
a yellow 1813 deck, and an 1814 red deck. For the first year
of the war players will only be utilizing the green 1812 deck.
At the end of each year any remaining cards for that year are
discarded and the deck of cards for the next year are moved
to the draw deck.
EXAMPLE: At the end of 1812 any cards remaining in the
1812 deck are moved to the discard pile and the cards in the
1813 deck are moved to the draw pile.
Players now proceed to the Pre-war Sequence.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

8

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

6.0 Pre-war Sequence
6.1 General Rule
This sequence simulates the early planning and maneuvring
that each side engaged in prior to the actual Declaration of War.
The Pre-war Sequence takes place before any Strategy cards
are drawn for the Spring-Summer turn of 1812.

6.2 Procedure
STEP 1: To begin, the Declaration of War (DOW) card is
temporarily removed from the deck and the rest of the 1812
deck is shuffled. The Turn Record marker is not placed on
the map.
STEP 2: Draw 13 cards from the top of the green 1812 deck
and add the DOW card. Now shuffle these 14 cards, with
the DOW card included. This 14-card deck will be referred
to as the Pre-war Deck.
STEP 3: The US player draws one single Strategy card from
the top of the Pre-war Deck. The player may now either keep
the card in his hand or play the card to move forces on the
game map under the following restrictions:
•	 No card can be played to score points
•	 No card can be played for events
•	 No land forces can move into enemy territory
•	 No naval units may enter Lake Control Boxes
STEP 4: After the US player has performed his action, the
British player does the same—draws one single card from
the Pre-war Deck and decides to either hold it in his hand,
or use it to move forces on the map with the same limitations listed above.
STEP 5: Players continue drawing cards from the Pre-war
Deck, one at a time, retaining them in their hand or playing
them in accordance with the restrictions in Step 3 until the
DOW card is drawn. The act of drawing the DOW card ends
the Pre-war Sequence.
STEP 6: Once the DOW card has been revealed and the
Pre-war Sequence is over, players draw the remaining cards
from the Pre-war Deck with the player who did not draw the
DOW card drawing first.

6.3 Draw Up to 7 Cards
6.31 For the purpose of this sequence, cards already played
during the Pre-war Sequence count towards the player’s hand
size. After cards are drawn, neither player’s hand may exceed
7 cards. The DOW card is included in this 7 card maximum.
6.32 Should the DOW card be the 14th card drawn and both
players have no cards in their hand, the Spring-Summer turn
would be over and players proceed to the Summer-Autumn turn.
DESIGN NOTE: This event would be rather unlikely as it
would have meant that both players did not hold any cards
in case of war but played every card drawn during the Prewar Sequence.

6.33 When the Pre-war Sequence is over, the Turn Record
marker is now put on the Spring-Summer turn of 1812 and
play proceeds to the Sequence of Play. The player who did not
draw the DOW card plays first. All card restrictions from the
Pre-war Sequence (Step 3) are now lifted.

7.0 Sequence of Play
Important: Each Winter turn follows a much shorter sequence
and is detailed in 16.0. The sequence below is used for SpringSummer and Summer-Autumn turns only.

7.1 Reinforcement Phase
Beginning with the Spring-Summer turn of each year players
will place all available reinforcements onto the map (there
are no reinforcements on Turn 1 of the game). As a reminder,
beginning in 1813 available naval vessels must be constructed
through the play of NBV points—they do not come on the map
automatically.

7.2 Deck Preparation
7.21 Procedure: If players have just completed the Pre-war
Sequence there is no new card deal, players proceed with the
cards they have in their hand. In the second half of 1812 and
non-Winter turns of 1813 and 1814 players are dealt a variable
number of cards: 7 in the Summer/Autumn turn of 1812, 8 in
1813 and 9 in 1814. There is a special sequence for dealing
cards in 1814 (see 7.25).
7.22 No Reshuffles: There are no “reshuffles” in the game,
and each card deck is customized to the year of play. If a new
year has commenced, players deal out cards from the corresponding year.
7.23 Hand Size: If a player held back cards (7.34) these are
counted against his new hand of cards.
7.24 Discard Previous Year Cards: At the end of any game
year there will be cards remaining in the main deck. These cards
are discarded and not introduced into the next year’s card deck.
Cards are never available for play in any other year than the
one specified on the card.
7.25 1814 Deck Preparation: The card deck for 1814 must be
prepared according to the following steps:
1. The Treaty of Ghent card is temporarily removed from
the deck and the deck is shuffled.
2. Deal out 9 cards to each player for the Spring-Summer
turn of 1814.
3. Reintroduce the Treaty of Ghent card back into the 1814
deck and reshuffle.
4. The deck is now ready for the Summer-Autumn 1814 turn.
DESIGN NOTE: The reason for the special deck preparation is to make the Treaty of Ghent card only available in
the second half of 1814.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

9

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

7.3 Strategy Card Action Phase

7.6 Turn Record Phase

7.31 Free Naval Withdrawal (1) Segment: (see 11.21)

After these actions are completed players move the Turn Record
marker forward and begin a new turn.

7.32 Action Phase Procedure (Movement and Combat): The
first player (7.33) plays a single card and performs all actions,
movement and combat. The second player can interrupt the
sequence momentarily by the play of a Reaction card which
may modify the move, or even cancel it. The second player
then plays a single card and performs his actions in the same
manner as the first player. The first player could also play a
Reaction card that could modify or cancel the second players
move. The Strategy Card Action Phase continues back and forth
until each player has played all of his cards or has finished his
turn by holding up to 2 cards.
7.33 First Player Determination
•	 First Player in 1812: The American player has the first
card play in the Summer-Autumn and Winter turns.
•	 First Player in 1813: At the start of 1813 each player rolls
one die. The player with the highest die roll will have first
card play for all turns during the year. The die roll for 1813
can be modified if one player has positive VPs (i.e., one
or more VPs). If this is the case, that player modifies the
roll by the number of VPs he has. If a player has 6 or more
VPs he automatically has the first play for all of 1813.
•	 1814: The British player is the first player for the entire year.
7.34 Holding Cards: Instead of playing a card a player can hold
one card back by placing it face down in front of him. In such
a case his play is completed and it is the other player’s turn. A
player may “hold back” two cards per hand, but only one card
per play. Holding back a card does count against the number
of cards the player will be dealt in the next hand.
7.35 Restrictions on Holding Cards: Cards for a particular
year may not be held back into the next year. For example, an
1812 card cannot be held back for play in 1813. A “Winter 18121813” card can be played in the Winter immediately following
the Autumn of 1812 turn but can never be held back until the
Winter of 1813-1814. In effect all “Winter” cards must be held
back if they are to be used as Event cards, the only way they
can be used during a Winter turn.

7.4 Mutual Fleet Return Phase
•	 Free Naval Withdrawal (2): During Summer-Autumn turns
both players mark which lakes they control with a Lake
Control marker of their side and return all of their naval
vessels to any lakeside town (usually their main naval base).
•	 Free Naval Return: During Spring-Summer turns both
players who have a Lake Control marker in the box has
the choice of a free naval move to move his naval units
back into the Lake Control Box.

7.5 Victory Point Check Phase
Double check the VP score as detailed in 4.18.

8.0 Strategy Cards
8.1 General Rule
There are 110 Strategy cards in the game divided into three
distinct decks sorted by year. 1812, 1813, and 1814. Only one
deck is used at a time.
OPV/NBV
Value
Card
Type

Card ID #
Card
Deck
Year
Card
Title

Game
Function

Historical
Description

8.2 How to Read the Strategy Cards
8.21 OPV/NBV: Operational Point Value and Naval Build Value
of a card. Numbers range from 1 to 3. The flag symbol below
the number indicates which side can use the card for the event.
Both sides can always use the card for operations
8.22 Card Type: Indicates the special function that a card has.
Note that in some cases a card actually can have two modes.
EXAMPLE: A card that reads “Operations/Battle” can be
utilized to perform as an operations card but if the action on
the card is performed a battle bonus is given also.
8.23 Card Deck Year: The year the event took place and the
deck the card is assigned to.
8.24 Card Title: Name of the event or action.
8.25 Battle/Reaction: Battle cards or Reaction cards will
have red coloring to denote their special function if not used
for their OPV/NBV value. Some cards act as dual activation
and Battle cards.
8.26 Historical Description: Information of historical interest to flesh out the purpose of the card but not necessary for
game play.
8.27 Game Function: Text that describes what the card does if
played for the event. Card instructions always take precedence
over any game rule, so it is possible that some card actions
allow a move that is normally restricted in regular game play.
8.28 ID. #: Included to aid in identification and email play.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

10

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

8.3 Strategy Card Uses
8.31 Eight Different Uses: Depending on the card type, there
are eight different ways that a Strategy card can be played. A
player can only perform one of the possible functions of the
card. The 8 functions are listed below.
EXAMPLE: The player could not use a “3” card to move
two units and then use the last point to restore a unit. Only
one function per card!
1. Event: The card can be used as an Event card in order to
fulfill the “historical event” or “action” described on the
card. Winter events can only be played in a “Winter” turn.
2. Activate Leader: The card can be used to activate a leader
if the card value is equal to or greater than the leader’s
“Command Value”. The leader in turn may then activate
as many units in his space as he is capable of commanding.
3. Activate Units: A card of any value can be used to activate units in a single space. The OPV number determines
how many land and/or naval units can move from that
space (8.6).
4. Construct/Repair Naval Units: The card can be used
for its NBV value in order to construct or repair naval
vessels (15.0).
5. Restore Units: A card of any value can be used to restore
(from its reduced side) British or US Regular army units
of “A” or “B” quality equal to the value of the card. Units
being restored do not necessarily have to be in the same
space. Note that Indian units do not qualify for this ability.
In order to restore a unit, it must be in an original friendly
space in their own territory and in supply.
EXAMPLE: A “2” card could restore two British units in
an originally supplied space in Upper or Lower Canada.
6. Create Supply Depot: A card of any value can be used
to create a Supply Depot in any space in friendly territory
(13.5).
7. As a Battle Card: Only one Battle card can be played to
enhance the chances of victory in a single battle round.
This advantage takes effect only in the round of battle it
is played. If the combat happens to last for several rounds
the advantage is lost, unless specifically exempted in the
text of the card. Players can play more than one Battle card
per battle in a space but still only one per battle round.
8. As a Reaction Card: A Reaction card can be played during the other player’s turn, to either modify his move, or
in some cases, cancel it. When played, the card is placed
on the discard pile and does not count as the player’s turn.
Reaction cards are played during the enemy player’s turn.
Detailed moves will be found in the playbook.

EXTENDED EXAMPLE: The US player plays a Campaign
card and declares that he is moving two forces. One force
under General Wilkinson at Sackets Harbour and another
under General Hampton at Plattsburg. (When playing a
Campaign card the forces to be activated must be stated before any force moves) The British player has a Heavy Rains
Reaction card and decides to play it against Hampton’s
force. A Heavy Rains card and the Contrary Winds card can
be used to cancel the move of only one force, not two.
The US player can move his forces in any order, and
he decides to move Wilkinson’s force first to French Mills
and then stops. It is now time to move Hampton’s force if he
wishes. The effect of the Heavy Rains card is to interdict the
space that Hampton is in. All units, including leaders, cannot move more than one space from Plattsburg if starting the
turn in the space or having had moved into the space. In this
case the US player decides that rather than have Hampton’s
forces move only one space he elects to have them remain at
Plattsburg.
It is now the British player’s turn to play. Play of a Reaction card in your opponent’s turn does not count as your
turn.

8.4 Leader Activation
8.41 When a leader is activated, he may move any
number of units in his space up to his Command
Limit and Movement Factor.
8.42 The leader may pick up units along his movement path,
drop units off, and keep moving as long as he does not exceed
his Movement Factor of 10 and each individual unit does not
exceed its Movement Factor of 6.
8.43 A leader with a higher rank (more stars on his counter)
can activate a leader of lesser rank, and thus be able to move
more units from a single space than he would normally be able
to move. A leader cannot activate another leader of equal rank
for the purpose of this rule.
EXAMPLE: “Brock”, rated a two star general, could move
up to 15 units if he moved to a space where General Proctor
was located with 5 units. Because Brock is senior to Proctor, he can pick up Proctor who is capable of moving 5 more
units and thus, if they all moved together, 15 units could
move to the target space at the limit of Brock’s movement.
Proctor must move with Brock as a single unit and could not
move off independently.
If Brock and Proctor began the turn on the same space
and the player wanted to have Brock and Proctor move to
two different spaces a Campaign card would be required. This
is because a Campaign card is the only card that activates two
different leaders independently. Although Brock could still
activate Proctor and drop him and any units he desires along
his movement path.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book
8.44 Picking Up Tecumseh: Any British leader
who begins in the same space as Tecumseh, or
passes through his space during movement, may
pick him up as described in 8.42. The British
leader in question can also move all Indian units stacked with
Tecumseh even if this exceeds the leader’s Command Limit.
The reason for this exception is Tecumseh can activate and
command an unlimited number of Indian units in his space (see
3.53).

8.5 Naval Leader Activation
When a naval leader is activated he can move any
number of naval vessels that begin stacked with
him, pick up other vessels, drop vessels off, pick
up land units, and drop them off. All these activities
can be accomplished as long as he has not exceeded his Movement Factor of 6. Picking up and dropping off naval units does
not cost any MPs. Naval leaders may never move land units on
land or add their combat modifier to a land or amphibious attack—they can only transport land units, or use them in an
amphibious assault. Naval leaders have a Movement Factor of
6—not 10 like land leaders.
DETAILED EXAMPLE OF A NAVAL LEADER ACTIVATION: It is the Autumn turn of 1812. Naval leader Chauncey
and the vessels Oneida, Conquest and Scourge are at Sackets Harbour NY. The vessels Julia and Hamilton are at Ogdensburg, and the vessels Fair American and Gov. Tompkins
are at Oswego. Chauncey is activated and takes the two vessels at Sackets Harbour with him and sails to Oswego, costing him 1 MP. He then picks up the two vessels there which
costs him no Movement Points. He then sails to Ogdensburg
for another MP and picks up the two vessels there. He now
moves all vessels into the Lake Control Box for another MP.
The total cost of the move was only 3 MPs. Note, that had
there been no naval leader, such a move would be impossible
no matter what value of card was played.

8.6 Activating Units
8.61 Movement: When units are activated, they must all be
located in the same space. Once activated, these units may split
off and move to different spaces. Single units moving without
a leader may never pick up other units along the way. A single
leader could also be moved in this manner by the expenditure
of a “1” card but in this case the leader would have to move
alone and not pick up or drop off any units.
EXAMPLE 1: A “3” card could move two land units from
one space and a naval unit from the same space. It could
also do an amphibious move using the naval unit and one
land unit (if capable of carrying it). This would cost “2” (1
for the land unit and 1 for the naval). It could then move the
other land unit if desired.

11

EXAMPLE 2: A “2” card can not be used to move one land
unit from Albany and another from Pittsburgh—all units
must be from a single space!
8.62 Combat: Activated unit(s) are allowed to enter enemy
occupied spaces and attack. If two or more are activated, they
are allowed to attack the same space together. Even though
units from a single space can move independently, they can
never attack independently the same single space. They could
attack different spaces independently.

8.7 Campaign Cards
8.71 General Rule: Cards designated as Campaign cards are
the only ones that allow the activation of two different leaders
in the same card play, or allow the activation of one leader and
one single unit from another space.
8.72 Procedure: If a player uses a Campaign card to activate
two leaders in two different spaces he must move one leader
at a time and perform all movement and combat with the first
leader before he moves the other leader. The player must
declare which leader will be activated before any movement
begins. Units moved by one leader cannot be moved again by
a second leader. This also holds true if he activates a leader in
one space and a single unit in another. It is not possible to have
two different leaders that begin their turn on different spaces to
move at the same time to a common space and have one single
combat. It is also not possible to have two different leaders on
the same space that are activated independently to join together
and have combat on the same space.

9.0 Land Movement
9.1 General Rule
When a unit is activated by a leader (8.4) or individually (8.6)
it moves from space to space, subtracting the cost to enter each
space from its total of 6 MPs.

9.2 Terrain (Path) Cost
Major Roads cost 1 MP, Trails cost 2 MPs and Major Invasion
Routes cost 3 MPs.

9.3 Entering Enemy-Occupied Spaces
When entering a space that has an enemy land combat unit in
it, all units and leaders must stop and move no further (Exception: Retreat Before Combat, 9.4). If the space contains only
enemy naval units the moving units do not have to stop, but if
they do the enemy vessels automatically escape or retreat to
any friendly lakeside town.

9.4 Retreat Before Combat
9.41 General Rule: When enemy unit(s) enter a space occupied by friendly unit(s), the friendly unit(s) have the option of
retreating before combat. If the decision to retreat is taken, all
units must retreat.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

12

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

9.42 The unit(s) can retreat without any penalty before combat
to a space that they currently control.
9.43 If the only space available for retreat is an enemy space
which they do not control, then the units may still retreat, but
every unit must be flipped to its reduced side. A unit that is
already reduced can Retreat Before Combat without further
loss and is not destroyed. Note: If a unit is flipped, and is also
out of supply, it is destroyed if it retreats.
EXAMPLE: A US unit could not retreat without a penalty
to an original British space unless there was a US unit of
sufficient size to take temporary control of it. If the unit was
forced to retreat to that space it could do so, but after retreating, would be flipped to its reduced side.
9.44 After a unit(s) has retreated, the unit(s) that caused the
retreat may continue moving until they have expended all of
their MPs.
9.45 A series of Retreats Before Combat could occur between
forces, and the same procedure is followed in each case. The
only circumstances that can halt this series of retreats is:
•	 The original moving player halts his movement.
•	 The retreating player has no space to retreat into, in which
case a battle occurs.
•	 The player voluntarily remains in the space, in which a
battle occurs.
9.46 In retreating, a unit(s) must always prioritize their retreat
in order to cause the least amount of step losses. This will often
be to a space in friendly territory but not always so. For retreat
priorities (see 10.71).
9.47 Indian units may never utilize naval retreat since these
units may never board naval vessels anyway (11.33). Extreme
caution should be exercised when invading enemy towns adjacent to a lake, as lake control affects their potential retreat.

9.5 Mandatory Retreat Before Combat
9.51 Any land force that achieves 9:1 odds against an enemy
land force causes a mandatory Retreat Before Combat against
the enemy unit(s).
9.52 The moving land force can still keep moving and cause
multiple Retreats Before Combat if the odds ratio is maintained.
Mandatory retreats are handled in the same manner as regular
DR results on the Combat Results Table.

9.6 Land Units Encountering Naval Units
9.61 If land units enter a space or end their turn in a space
containing only enemy naval vessels, those vessels must immediately retreat to any friendly lakeside town on the same lake.
9.62 If every friendly lakeside town is currently controlled by
enemy units on the same lake then the naval unit(s) can retreat
to the Lake Control Box but only if that player already has units
in it. If this is not possible then the units are destroyed. Note
the Lake Huron-Lake Erie connection as indicated in rule 2.6.

10.0 Land Combat
10.1 General Rule
When a unit(s) enters a space that contains an enemy unit, and
those enemy units do not Retreat Before Combat (9.4), it must
immediately end its turn, and in the ensuing combat must attack all enemy units in the space. Combat always results with
only one player in possession of the space where the combat
takes place.

10.2 Procedure
10.21 Add up the combat values of all attacking and defending
units to determine the odds of the attack, and then consult the
Land Combat Results Table to determine any die roll modifiers
due to the odds. For odds calculations fractions are rounded
down. If the space contains a fort, the defender adds the fort’s
value to the defending side’s combat value (Exception: Indians,
see 2.76). Each player then identifies their Lead Unit for the
combat. Once all modifiers have been calculated (10.4) the
attacker rolls two dice, applies the modifiers, and consults the
Land Combat Results Table for the result of the battle.
10.22 One Attack per Space: A space can only be attacked
once per card, but there could be multiple rounds in a combat
(see 10.6 Continue Combat). Players playing a Campaign card
cannot attack a space with the first force and then move with
and attack the same space with the second force.
10.23 Reduced Units and Combat Value: Reduced units can
enter enemy spaces as part of the attacking force, but their
combat values are not added to the force’s attack value. The
combat values of reduced units in the defending force are always
added to the defensive force’s defense value.

9.53 A leader alone in a space must perform a mandatory retreat
when any enemy combat unit enters the space.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

10.3 Lead Units
10.31 Each player must identify their Lead Unit for each combat. The classes of Lead Units are compared and a + or – DRM
is applied based on the “class” differences. Players do not have
to select their highest classed unit as the Lead Unit, but the
attacker must identify his Lead Unit before the defender does.
Players may change their Lead Units for each round of combat.
10.32 The following rules apply to Lead Units:
1) If the combat result indicates a step loss, the first loss must
be taken by the Lead Unit,
2) A reduced unit cannot be selected as the Lead Unit in any
combat except for cases (3) and (4) below. If the Lead Unit
suffered a step loss in the current round it could not be the
designated Lead Unit in any following round.
3) If the defender has only reduced units in the first round
of combat he does not have the option of choosing a Lead
Unit. In this case, the lowest classed unit must be selected.
If a player has several units in the lowest class the player
may choose any of them as the Lead Unit for the purposes
of assigning step losses.
4) If the defender has only reduced units in a fort space he
utilizes the same procedure as case (3) but here the class of
the unit chosen cannot be higher than the fort’s class.
EXAMPLE: If a stack of reduced “C” class units were
defending on a “B” class fort space, their class is considered to be “C” not “B”. If there were at least one full
strength unit on the first round they would get the benefit
of the fort and would be considered “B” class.
5) If defending a fort with a mixture of “B” and “C” class
units the defender is not required to select his “B” class unit
as the Lead Unit. He would still get the benefit of the fort
should he choose a “C” class unit to lead. Note, this is different than case (4) where the defender begins the turn with
all “C” class units that are flipped.

10.4 Land Combat Modifiers
10.41 Terrain: Terrain modifiers are shown on the Land Combat Results Table and only count for the first round of combat
should multiple rounds occur. These modifiers are:
–1 	 if an Amphibious Attack.
–1	 if the attack is in a forested space. There are two exceptions to this modifier if Indians are involved:
–2 	 if Regular or Militia units attack a forested space containing only Indian units.
+1 if Indians (exclusively) attack Regular or Militia units
in a forested space.
–1	 if the attack is across a Major Invasion Route.
–1	 if attacking Montreal across a Major Invasion Route.
(This would result in a net modifier of –2, one for Montreal and another for the Major Invasion Route)

13

10.42 Commanding Leaders: If the commanding leader of the
attacking force has a “+” modifier it is added to the die roll. If
the commanding leader of the defending force has a “+” modifier it is subtracted from the die roll.
10.43 Battle Cards: Add (for attacker) or subtract (for defender) the modifier for any Battle card played. The attacker
must decide whether to play a Battle card before the defender.
Battle cards only apply to the current battle round unless specifically exempted in the text of the card. Players can choose
to play additional Battle cards on subsequent rounds, but only
one Battle card can be played per round per player.
10.44 British Regulars: If the US player attacks
a British force containing British Regulars, and the
battle occurs in a clear terrain space, then the US
player suffers a –1 DRM for all rounds of that
combat. This modifier is applicable only during 1812 and 1813
turns. This modifier does not apply if the British are defending
in a fort or if the British player is attacking.
10.45 Summary of Land Combat Modifiers:
•	 Force Ratio (10.21)
•	 Lead Units (10.3)
•	 Terrain (10.41)
•	 Commanding Leaders (10.42)
•	 Battle Cards (10.43)
•	 British Regulars (10.44)

10.5 Land Combat Results
10.51 Explanation of Combat Results
DR: The defender must retreat one space (10.7).
AR: The attacker must retreat one space (10.73).
AR-1: Same as AR, but in addition the attacker must flip the
Lead Unit to its reduced side.
AR-2: Same as AR, but in addition the attacker must flip two
units to their reduced side, with the Lead Unit being flipped
first. If only reduced units remain the player has the choice
of which unit to eliminate.
DR-1: Same as DR, but in addition the defender must flip
the Lead Unit to its reduced side or another unit if there was
no Lead Unit.
DR-2: Same as DR, but in addition the defender must flip
two units to their reduced side, with the Lead Unit being
flipped first. If only reduced units remain the player has the
choice of which unit to eliminate.
EX: This result causes both the attacker and defender to
reduce their Lead Units. If the defender does not have a Lead
Unit he takes the loss from another unit of his choice and
the rest of the forces must retreat. In the odd case of combat
where there is only one unit attacking and only one unit
defending and the exchange would result in the annihilation
of both sides, treat the result as an AR instead.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

14

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

10.52 Indicating and Selecting Step Losses: Losses are satisfied by flipping units to their reduced side or removing them if
they don’t have one. No reduced unit may be selected to satisfy
a step loss if another non-reduced unit is available, even if this
means the non-reduced unit would be eliminated instead. Some
units do not have a second step, see 3.17.

10.6 Continue Combat
10.61 If the result of a round of combat does not result in the
attacker or defender having to retreat and both players have
units remaining that are not reduced, the combat continues
for a second round. Note that the modifiers will change after
the first round of combat because terrain no longer enters the
calculation and the Lead Unit might be different.
10.62 Battle Cards and Continue Combat: Battle cards can
be played in later rounds of combat if they occur, but players
must play a new card in each round. A Battle card can only be
used in one round of combat unless it specifically states that
the card can be used in all rounds. The attacker must state his
intention to use a Battle card first before the defender.
10.63 Depleted Forces: If, after the first round of combat, the
attacker has only reduced units remaining, the attack is over, and
he must retreat. Conversely, if the defender only has “reduced
units” and the attacker does not, the defender must retreat.
DESIGN NOTE: To clarify, after any round of combat if
both players have only reduced units then the defender has
won the combat and the attacker must retreat.

10.7 Retreats
10.71 Procedure: If forced to retreat, the defender must move
his force one space using the restrictions below listed in order
of priority:
1)	He must retreat in a manner that causes the least number
of steps to be lost.
2)	He must retreat in such a manner as to keep his force in
supply (if possible).
3)	Retreat to a space in friendly territory.
4)	Retreat by water (rule 10.8).
5)	Retreat to an enemy controlled space.
10.72 Retreat Restrictions and Penalties: Units that retreat
must abide by the following restrictions and penalties:
•	 Defender retreats are never allowed into the space from
which the attacker moved to initiate his attack.
•	 Retreat to Enemy Occupied Spaces: Units cannot retreat
into an enemy controlled space containing enemy units.
However, units that have to retreat to an enemy occupied
space that is not controlled by those enemy units, they
instead bump those units one space and those units suffer
any ill effects of such a retreat.
•	 Retreat into Enemy Territory: If the only space available
to retreat to is an enemy space free of combat units then
all of his retreating units are flipped to their reduced side.

Units that are already reduced and forced to retreat to an
enemy controlled space are not destroyed unless they are
also out of supply in which case they are destroyed.
•	 Fort Mackinaw and Fort St. Joseph: Land units forced
to retreat from either Fort Mackinaw or Fort St. Joseph,
surrender instead and are eliminated unless they have naval
vessels of sufficient size to allow a retreat by water.
•	 No Retreat Routes: Units, including leaders, that have no
retreat route are removed from the map and are considered
to have surrendered.
PLAY NOTE: Retreat penalties to uncontrolled spaces are
severe. It’s always a good idea to secure your rear areas
before engaging in combat.
10.73 Attacker Retreats: In most cases this will be the last
space that he moved from in order to make the attack. The only
exceptions to this are:
•	 The unit may retreat to an adjacent space that causes less
step losses to the attacker.
•	 Retreat by water (rule 10.8).
•	 The unit may retreat to a space that puts the unit back in
supply. This is important and very likely will not occur
very often.
EXAMPLE: An American unit occupies Kingston and is cutting the supply of all British units to the west. A British unit
moves from Smiths Creek to Kingston to attack the American
unit. The British unit is out of supply for the attack, but if
repulsed could retreat to Gananoque if that space is unoccupied and puts him back in supply. If it does not put him back
in supply he cannot retreat to that particular space.
10.74 The attacker has all of the conditions imposed on his
forces the same way the defender does. ie: if he had to retreat
to a space that is in enemy territory, all of his units would have
to be flipped to their reduced side.

10.8 Retreat by Water
10.81 A unit performing a retreat, including Retreat Before
Combat could take advantage of a naval retreat. Keep in mind
that the first priority of any retreat is to keep losses to zero if
possible. Therefore, if a legal naval retreat can cause a zero
loss over a land retreat, the naval retreat priority would be
implemented over a land retreat that causes a loss.
10.82 In order to retreat by water the unit(s) must be in a lakeside town with sufficient naval vessels in the same space able
to carry them. They may retreat to any friendly lakeside town
or a lakeside town that they currently control.
10.83 If the opposing player is in control of the lake, retreat
is not possible.
10.84 If the player has insufficient transport capacity to carry
all of the units and they have no other space to retreat to then
any units in excess of this capacity must surrender and are
removed from the game.

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

10.9 Leader Capture
If a leader’s forces are destroyed in combat the leader takes an
automatic DR or AR result as the case may be. If surrounded
or there is no retreat route available the leader is captured and
removed from play. Should General Brock be captured, the flip
side of his counter, General Sheaffe may not enter play.

11.0 Naval Movement & Lake Control
11.1 Naval Movement
11.11 Naval units can only be in one of two places on the map—
either in a lakeside town space or in a Lake Control Box. Ships
cannot end their turn in a Lake Transit Box. Units that cannot
fulfill this requirement are destroyed.
11.12 Land units may never end their turn embarked on naval
units. If embarking land units, naval units must have enough
movement points to drop off the land units or they may not
pick them up at all.
11.13 Naval units have a Movement Factor of 6 and can be
moved independently of a leader in exactly the same manner
as independent land units are activated.
11.14 In order to move a naval unit of any type from one lakeside town to another or the Lake Control Box, the player must
play a Strategy card.
EXAMPLES: A Strategy card with an OPV value of “2”
could move two naval vessels from one space. A lake transport move without a leader would require a Strategy card
with a minimum value of “2”— one Operations Point to activate the vessel, and another to activate the land unit it is
carrying.
11.15 Naval MP Cost: Naval leaders can only move to/from
lakeside towns and Lake Control Boxes if accompanied by at
least one naval vessel. Vessels can move without leaders. Naval
movement incurs the following MP cost:
1 MP	
1 MP	

moving from one lakeside town to another.
pick up any number of land units (if capacity allows).
There is no cost to pick up naval units or drop them
off.
1 MP	 drop off any amount of land units.
1 MP	 to enter a Lake Control Box.
2 MPs	 to move from any lakeside town on Lake Erie or
Huron to the Lake Transit Box (no units can end
their turn in the Lake Transit Box).
+1 MP	 an amphibious attack costs 1 extra MP over and
above the regular cost of 1 MP to disembark land
units.

15

EXAMPLE: If a player used a “2” Strategy card to activate
two schooners at Oswego, they could move into the Lake
Control Box (cost 1 MP), drop one schooner off, (0 MP) and
the second schooner could continue on to Ft. Niagara (1
MP) and end its movement there.

11.2 Free Naval Moves
There are three instances under which a naval move can be
done at no cost, where the expenditure of a Strategy card is
not required.
11.21 Free Naval Withdrawal (1): At the beginning of a
player’s turn, before he plays or holds any Strategy card he
may move his naval units from a Lake Control Box to any
friendly lakeside town that the units could normally move to.
This free naval move is done before the play of a Strategy card
and thus cannot be cancelled by the play of a Contrary Winds
card. Moving naval units onto the lake in the normal course
of a player’s turn does cost a Strategy card. Those naval units
that take advantage of the free Naval Withdrawal cannot move
during that players card play. Therefore you cannot take a free
Naval Withdrawal and then in your card play move those same
naval units to another lake side town or back into the control
box. No move whatsoever is allowed in that card play.
11.22 Free Naval Withdrawal (2): In the Mutual Fleet Return
Phase of the Summer-Autumn turn, players who have naval
vessels in Lake Control Boxes must return them at no cost
to any lakeside town on the same lake. When a player does
so, place a Lake Control marker corresponding with his sides
color in the box.
11.23 Free Naval Return (3): In the Mutual Fleet Return Phase
of the Spring-Summer turn the player who has a Lake Control
marker in the box has the choice of a free naval move once
again. This time he can place all, some or none of his naval
units back into the Lake Control Box. In essence the reverse of
what he did in the Mutual Fleet Return Phase of the SummerAutumn turn. However if the player does not move any naval
vessels back into the Lake Control Box, lake control is lost,
and the Victory Point Track must be adjusted.

11.3 Lake Transport
11.31 Naval units may carry land units from one friendly lakeside town to another friendly lakeside town but only if the lake
is not controlled by the enemy player.
11.32 A land combat unit may never end its turn embarked on
a naval unit. A naval unit must have sufficient MPs to drop off
a land unit or it may not carry the unit at all.
11.33 Indian and Dragoon units cannot be carried by naval
vessels.
11.34 Naval units cannot end their turn in a Lake Control Box
when carrying land units.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

16

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

11.35 Carrying Capacity: Ships have the following capacities:
•	 schooner/sloop	

1 unit of combat size 1 or 2 (detachments)
•	 4 schooners/sloops	 1 combat unit of any size
•	 brig	
1 single combat unit
•	 corvette	
1 single combat unit
•	 frigate	
2 combat units
•	 ship of the line	
3 combat units

11.36 In order for a land unit to be transported by water, it must
have been located in a lakeside town before the card used for
activating the naval unit(s) was utilized. After any land unit,
including leaders, have been transported and dropped off in a
lakeside town, they move no further.
EXAMPLE: The brig Oneida and the 18th Regiment are located at Ft. Niagara NY. The play of a card with an OPV of
at least “2” allows the Oneida to transport the 18th Regiment to any lakeside town on Lake Ontario. After dropping
off the land unit, the Oneida could move to the Lake Control
Box and end its move there. The 18th Regiment could move
no further.
11.37 If a land leader activates units in a lakeside town for the
purpose of lake transport or amphibious attack, the leader must
have began the turn in the lakeside town. (See the Playbook for
an example of a land leader activating naval units.)

11.4 Lake Control
11.41 General Rule: The only units that may ever enter a Lake
Control Box and remain there are naval leaders and naval units.
Naval units entering a Lake Control Box must stop and fight a
naval battle if enemy naval units are present in the box (12.0).
Only one side can have naval units in the box at the end of a
turn. Control of a lake is determined only after all movement
and combat have been resolved.
DESIGN NOTE: If the side controlling the lake loses the
battle, it loses 2 VPs and the winning side takes control,
gaining 2 VPs. Therefore a four point swing is possible when
one player loses control of the lake, and the other player
takes control.

11.44 Lake Control Markers: These markers are
only play aids to remind players who controlled
the lake before the onset of Winter. It also serves
to prevent the Victory Point marker from having
to be moved every Winter since naval units cannot control the
lake at that time. Players should remember that a Lake Control
marker does not control the lake. Only naval vessels in the Lake
Control Box can do that. The Lake Control marker is only a
mnemonic device to indicate which player had control last
during the Autumn turn.

11.5 Amphibious Attacks
11.51 Definition: An Amphibious Attack consists of moving
land unit(s) carried by naval unit(s) to any lakeside space that
is not under friendly control.
EXAMPLE: An American unit carried by a naval unit to
the Smiths Creek space is carrying out an amphibious move
even though there may be no British units there and it is a
zero space. The main point that makes the attack amphibious
is the fact that the target space is uncontrolled and is enemy
territory.
11.52 MP Cost: An amphibious attack costs 1 extra MP over
and above the regular cost of 1 MP to disembark land units.
Effectively it cost 2 MPs to make an amphibious attack. Lands
units participating in an amphibious attack must end their move
in the space under attack, but the naval units may continue
moving if they have MPs remaining.
11.53 Failed Assaults: An amphibious attack that fails always
results in the attacker retreating by water, since the enemy
player cannot have been in control of the lake, a condition that
must be met in order for an amphibious attack to be permitted.
The attacking player must return all land units that participated
(including the accompanying naval units) to any friendly
lakeside town, not necessarily the town they embarked from,
however all units must retreat to a single lakeside town.
PLAY NOTE: Extreme caution must be exercised when performing an amphibious attack because you must leave sufficient shipping in the target space to retreat just in case the
attack fails.

11.42 Effects of Control: Besides earning the controlling player
2 VPs, lake control prevents the enemy from using the lake as a
supply line, conducting Amphibious Attacks, conducting Lake
Transport and Retreats by Water.

11.54 Amphibious attacks follow similar rules to lake transport
(see 11.3), with the difference that enemy units can be at the
target lakeside town space, which is not permitted for Lake
Transport.

11.43 Lake control does not inhibit the movement of enemy
lake vessels in any other way. Enemy vessels can still conduct
naval movement from one lakeside town to another or enter the
Lake Control Box to initiate a battle. Some Event cards may
override or trump this rule.

11.55 Amphibious Attack DRM: In an amphibious attack a
DRM of –1 is applied to the first round of combat, in addition
to any other applicable modifiers.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

17

12.4 Explanation of Naval Combat Results

12.0 Naval Combat
12.1 General Rule
When a player moves naval vessels into a Lake Control Box
that contains enemy units a naval battle must occur and the
moving player is considered the attacker. Unlike land combat
there is no retreat before battle in naval combat. Naval combat
can only occur in a Lake Control Box. In no other instance do
naval units ever engage each other in combat, even if temporarily in the same lakeside town space (which could occur in an
amphibious invasion).

12.2 Procedure
When a naval combat occurs a single die is rolled, modifiers
applied, and the result is implemented from the Naval Combat
Results Table. There is only one round of naval combat, after
which one side will have to retreat to a friendly lakeside town
and the winning side will remain in the Lake Control Box if
they have undamaged vessels remaining.

12.3 Naval Combat Modifiers
12.31 Force Ratio: If one player has more vessels than the
other, that player receives a +1 (attacker) or –1 (defender)
DRM. If one’s side has twice as many vessels or more, that
side receives a +2/–2 DRM. Unlike land combat, naval units
have no printed Combat Factor on the counters.
12.32 Lead Unit: Each player chooses his
vessel, which
will usually be his best quality vessel. The quality of the vessels is compared and for each level of quality over the enemy
vessel that player would get another +1 DRM. An “A” class
vessel attacking a “B” class vessel would get a +1 DRM. An
“A” class vessel attacking a “C” would get a +2 DRM. If the
defender’s class was better than the attacker’s the modifiers
would be negative.
12.33 Naval Leader: If the commanding naval leader of the
attacking force has a “+” combat modifier it is added to the die
roll. If the commanding naval leader of the defending force has
a “+” combat modifier it is subtracted from the die roll.

12.41 Strikes Flag: When a player receives this result his
vessel, or as the case may be his entire fleet, surrenders and is
eliminated from the game. The victor of the battle still must
roll for potential losses. See the Naval Combat Results Table
12.42 Step Loss: A player must turn his lead vessel over to
the reduced side and if there are any further losses required he
may turn over any other vessels of his choice. Flipped vessels
must return to any lakeside town immediately, which will usually be a naval base where the unit can eventually be repaired.
Flipped vessels cannot enter a Lake Control Box, perform lake
transport, amphibious attack, or engage in another combat.
They can move to another lakeside town. Flipped vessels are
ignored in combat, and if present suffer all of the results that
can occur in association with that naval combat.

12.5 Naval Retreats
12.51 After naval combat is concluded one player’s units will
usually remain in the Lake Control Box unless both sides were
damaged to the point where all units must return to a lakeside
town.
12.52 When a naval unit is damaged it must immediately
retreat to any friendly lakeside town on that particular lake at
the end of the combat. This is true for the victorious player in
the battle also.
12.53 If there are no friendly lakeside towns that a player can
retreat to, the vessels are destroyed instead. Naval units on Lake
Erie can retreat to Lake Huron and vice versa.

12.6 Naval Leader Casualties
When a Strikes Flag result is achieved against a naval leader, the
leader is flipped to its reverse side, and placed in any lakeside
town on the same lake on which the battle was fought. This
represents a new leader arriving to replace the captured leader.
Should a replacement leader also be captured, merely repeat the
procedure by placing the leader once more in a lakeside town.

12.34 Frigate Bonus: If one side has frigates present and the
other side does not, a +1 (attacker) or –1 (defender) DRM is
applied.
12.35 Small Ships Penalty: If one side’s fleet consists of only
schooners and sloops, and the other side has at least one brig,
corvette, frigate or ship of the line, the side with schooners/
sloops receives a –1 DRM if attacking. If the schooner/sloop
force is defending, the attacking player would receive a +1
DRM.
12.36 Battle Card: Play of a Battle card can also modify the
combat result by a +1 or a –1 as the case may be.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

18

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

13.0 Supply
13.1 Purpose
All units on the map must be able to trace a line of supply (13.3)
to a supply source (13.2) or suffer the penalties listed in 13.4
for being out of supply.

13.2 Supply Sources
13.21 British: The supply source for the British player is always
Quebec City, unless he builds a Supply Depot which acts as a
temporary supply source.
13.22 American: The supply sources for the American player
are Albany, Pittsburgh, Mansfield or Ft. MacArthur, unless he
builds a Supply Depot which acts as a temporary supply source.

13.3 Supply Lines
13.31 A line of supply exists if a unit can trace supply through
a series of connected spaces, of any length, from the unit to
the supply source.
13.32 A line of supply cannot pass through a space in enemy
territory unless the space contains a friendly unit of sufficient
size to control the space.
13.33 A line of supply can pass through spaces in friendly territory that contain enemy units as long as the enemy units have
insufficient strength to take control of the spaces.
EXAMPLE: If an American unit with a Combat Factor of
“4” occupies the London space the supply line is cut and
any British units west of London would be Out of Supply unless they had a supply line over Lake Erie. It does not matter
if he American unit is itself out of supply, the fact that it is of
sufficient size to control the space cuts off British supply in
this instance.
13.34 Indians: These units have the ability to interrupt supply
lines only in spaces that have a VP value of “0” or “1”.
13.35 Lakes: The lakes can be used as a line of supply as long
as the enemy player does not control the lake. In order to use the
lake as a line of supply, the unit need only be able to trace a line
to a lakeside town, then over the lake to another lakeside town
and then to a friendly supply source. A player does not have to
have naval units on the lake to act as a supply line since supply
schooners were used, and these are not depicted in the game. For
purposes of supply, lake control is determined at the end of the
turn in which a card has been played that enables such control.
13.36 A unit that begins a card play in supply is still in supply
if it is attacked in that same card play, but not if it attacks. In
other words a unit cannot start its turn in supply, move into
a situation where it is not in supply, and then attack without
suffering the effects of being out of supply. This is NOT true
for the defender.
13.37 A defending unit starting an enemy card play in supply,
will remain in supply even if it is cut off through the use of an
enemy Campaign card.

EXAMPLE: The US player utilizes a Campaign card to land
a force at York. Using the same card, he moves another force
to attack a British unit at Burlington that has only now been
put out of supply. For this card play, the British unit is still
in supply because it began the card play in supply. The effect
of being out of supply would be in effect during the British
player’s next turn.

13.4 Out of Supply Effects
Units that cannot trace a line of supply suffer the following
penalties:
•	 Cannot be Restored (8.3, case 5).
•	 Have their Combat Factors halved (rounded up) for all
offensive and defensive combat. For the purposes of this
rule total the strength of all forces in a space, including
forts, and then take one half. Do not take one half of each
individual unit.
•	 Reduced units that are out of supply and retreat into enemy
territory are eliminated (10.72).
•	 Reduced units that are out of supply that suffer Winter
Attrition in enemy territory are eliminated (16.23).
•	 Map spaces that have no supply line cannot be the construction location of a Supply Depot (13.52).

13.5 Supply Depots
13.51 Supply Depots can be used to act as a supply
source for friendly forces in their original territory,
and increases the Winter Quartering Value of a
space by 4.
13.52 Creating Supply Depots: In order to create a Supply
Depot, a card with an OPV value of at least one must be played,
and the space chosen for the depot must be in supply in an
original friendly territory. Supply Depots can never be built
in enemy territory.
13.53 A Supply Depot acts as a supply source for the remainder
of that game year only. All depots are removed at the end of
each year after Winter Attrition is complete.
13.54 The counter mix is absolute, and players can only construct three Supply Depots per side, but keep in mind that Supply Depots are destroyed before the Spring turn of every year.
13.55 A Supply Depot is removed under these conditions:
•	 During Winter turns after Winter Attrition is complete.
•	 An enemy unit (naval unit included) occupies the space
with no friendly units present.
13.56 A Supply Depot can also supply 4 extra units on the space
it occupies for the purposes of Winter Attrition.
13.57 If a friendly town has been destroyed it cannot be used for Winter Quartering unless a Supply
Depot is built there. In which case up to four units
could quarter there on the space.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

19

14.35 Reinforcements and Winter Attrition: Units that are
brought into play as reinforcements, or that can be moved in
Winter turns, are still subject to Winter Attrition after all placement, movement and combat.

14.0 Reinforcements
14.1 General Rule
Land reinforcements arrive at the beginning of the turn and are
placed simultaneously before the cards are dealt out for the new
season. It does not cost any MPs to place land or naval units on
the map. The Set Up Charts show the turn of arrival for each
unit in the game and where it is placed.
PLAY NOTE: Most US units arrive at either Ft. MacArthur, Mansfield, Pittsburgh, or Albany. British units arrive at
Quebec City but in some cases at specific spaces designated
on the player aid.

14.2 Delayed Reinforcements
14.21 Reinforcements can be held back voluntarily for one
game turn (not card play) by placing them on the Turn Record
Track for the next turn. If they are not brought on at that time
they are permanently removed from the game.
14.22 A player can bring some reinforcements on the map and
delay others, but this delay can still be no longer than one turn.

14.3 Enemy Occupied Reinforcement Spaces
14.31 If enemy land units are in control of the reinforcement
space (see 14.33) and if the player wishes to do so, the reinforcements are placed on the space, and must engage in battle
immediately. The action of placing the units and fighting a
battle does not consume a Strategy card nor does it count as a
player’s turn. This action occurs after players have drawn their
new Strategy cards and in the phase of the player so concerned.
The player can still use a Strategy card to move other units on
the map. This is the only instance when a player can fight a
battle as the attacker without playing a Strategy card.
14.32 If the reinforcement units do not win the combat and
force the defender from the space, the reinforcement units are
lost for the entire game.
14.33 Enemy units must control the space in order to have any
effect on reinforcement arrival. If enemy land units are on a
reinforcement space but do not control the space, then they must
automatically retreat one space and allow the reinforcing units
to come onto the map. This could be the case if an enemy unit
was of insufficient size to control the space. Even the arrival
of a lone leader causes this retreat. To block anything you must
control the space.
14.34 Blocked Leader Reinforcements: In the case where
a land leader is the only unit that arrives at a reinforcement
space and that space is controlled by an enemy unit, the leader
is held off map until the space becomes free once again. This
can occur after any card play and the leader could be placed in
the player’s next card play, not necessarily the next game turn.

14.4 Naval Reinforcements
14.41 The only naval units that appear directly on the map after
the game begins are the US Navy schooners that are scheduled
to arrive during the second half of 1812.
14.42 These units can only be placed on the map if their entry
space is not controlled by an enemy unit. If there is an enemy
unit on the space but of insufficient size to control the space,
see case 14.33 above. If the space is controlled by the enemy
these schooners are lost permanently and can never be introduced back into the game. Rule 14.2 does not apply in this case.
14.43 Naval Leaders: For naval leaders, such as Chauncey, if
the space of their indicated arrival is controlled by enemy units
then they can come onto the map at any friendly lakeside town
on the same lake. If none exist then they are not brought onto
the game until one becomes free (see 14.34).

15.0 Building & Repair of Naval Units
15.1 Building Naval Units
15.11 Unlike land units that are introduced “free” onto the
map, both players must build their naval units in order to be
able to use them. The only exceptions to this are the American
schooner units that arrive directly onto the map in the second
half of 1812 and do not have to be built. Historically, these
were merchant vessels seized by the US government and hastily converted for war.
15.12 Building Procedure: In 1813 and 1814, naval units
become available to both players but they must be constructed
before they are placed on the map. In order to place them
on the map, players must play a card using its NBV value to
determine how many and what type of vessels are placed. A
single card can be used to build or repair (15.2) at more than
one base at a time.
EXAMPLE: The play of a “3” NBV card could be used to
repair two damaged vessels at Kingston, and build a brig at
Ft. Malden.
15.13 Place new vessels directly onto the map at the naval base
that is capable of constructing that particular vessel.
NOTE: Ft. Malden is the main British base on Lake Erie
and should be held as long as possible. The town of York on
Lake Ontario can repair vessels in addition to Kingston, but
the only vessel that can be built there is the Corvette Brock.
See 15.33 Back-up Naval Bases.

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

20

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

15.14 Order of Builds: The vessels can be built in any order the
player desires but the order of appearance must be respected as
to the year and the lake. The colored dots on the chart indicate
the earliest turn and year the vessel can be constructed in.
EXAMPLE: A vessel slated for 1814 (red dot) cannot be
constructed in 1813 (yellow dot).
15.15 A vessel that is available on one lake is not available on
another. Consult the Ship Production Chart on the map to see
what vessels are available on each lake.
15.16 Enemy Occupied Construction Spaces: Should there
be an enemy unit on the construction space but of insufficient
size to control the space the ships are still built and the enemy
unit is ignored. The rationale here is that the enemy units are in
the vicinity but do not control the town or the naval dock yards.
15.17 Building Cost: The cost to build vessels is determined
by vessel type:
	
	
	
	

NBV	
1	
2	
3	

Vessel Type
Builds 2 schooners/sloops, or 1 brig, or 1 corvette
Builds 1 frigate
Combinations of above

15.2 Repair of Naval Units
15.21 Free Naval Repair: During each Winter turn players
can flip any reduced naval vessels to their full strength side if
they are located in a friendly naval base. This action does not
require the play of a card.
15.22 Repair with Strategy Cards: During any non-Winter
turn players can repair naval vessels in a friendly naval base
by playing a card for its NBV value.
15.23 Repair Costs: The cost to repair vessels is determined
by vessel type:
	 NBV	 Vessel Type
	 ½	
Schooners/Sloops
	 1	
all other vessels
EXAMPLE: The play of a card with a NBV of 2 would allow
the repair of 1 brig, and 1 frigate or 2 schooners and 1 brig.

15.34 On Lake Ontario the American back-up base is Oswego,
for the British it is York. On Lake Erie the main American base
is Buffalo in 1812, and Erie, PA. becomes automatically another
main base in 1813. For the British, the main base is Ft. Malden
and the back-up base is Port Dover.

16.0 Winter Turns
16.1 Winter Turn Sequence of Play
During Winter turns, no cards are dealt, there is no Reinforcement Phase, and the Action Phase only occurs if players held
Winter Event cards from the Summer-Autumn turn. The sequence of each Winter turn is as follows:
1. Action Phase: Players may play one or two Winter Event
cards they held from the Summer-Autumn turn as events.
First Player is determined in the same way as the other
two turns of that year.
2. Winter Attrition: Land units suffer Winter Attrition
(16.2).
3. Free Naval Repair: All damaged naval vessels at friendly
naval bases are automatically repaired (15.21).
4. Remove Supply Depots: Remove all Supply Depots from
the map (13.55).

16.2 Winter Attrition
16.21 During Winter turns, if the number of land units (not
Combat Factors), exceeds the Winter Quartering value of the
space the excess units will suffer a step loss (Exceptions: 16.23).
Naval units do not suffer any effects of Winter Attrition.
16.22 The player affected by the loss has the choice of which
units to lose with the following restriction: a fresh unit must be
reduced before an already reduced unit is removed from play.
EXAMPLE 1: It is a Winter turn, and the US player has two
units at full strength that are in the Cleveland space. Since
the WQ value of Cleveland is only “1”, the US player must
flip one of the units to its reduced side.

15.24 You can use a card of any value to build or repair vessels
but the costs can’t exceed the value of the card.

15.3 Naval Bases
15.31 All new construction has to take place at a designated
naval base for the lake.
15.32 A naval base destroyed through the use of an Event card
is destroyed permanently. A naval base controlled by an enemy
unit is not destroyed but is unavailable for use.
15.33 Back-up Naval Bases: Back-up naval bases only come
into play if the primary naval base on a lake is occupied or
destroyed. In addition they only become functional in the next
game year after a base is lost. Therefore it is very important to
protect your primary naval base on each lake.
© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book
16.23 A unit that is already reduced is never removed from
the game due to Winter Attrition unless both of the conditions
below exist:
•	 The unit is in enemy territory and the unit is out of supply
•	 The unit occupies a space with a Winter Quartering value
of “0” (16.26)
EXAMPLE 2: Continuing the previous example, if one of
the US units was already reduced, no unit would be flipped
or removed because the units are in friendly territory, and
the supply situation is irrelevant. The above two cases cited
above were not met.
DESIGN NOTE: This means that units that are already reduced are virtually ignored for purposes of Winter Attrition,
unless both of the cases mentioned exist.
EXAMPLE 3: The US player has five units in London for
the winter, three full strength units and two reduced units.
The WQ value of London is 3. The US player is over quartered by two units. Assume that the US player’s supply line
is cut because he does not control Oxford, Thamesville or
Port Talbot. Therefore two units minimum must suffer the
consequences of Winter Attrition. In this case the two fresh
units must be flipped because rule 16.2 must still be obeyed.
That is, you may not remove a reduced unit when a fresh unit
can take the penalty instead.
EXAMPLE 4: Continuing the previous example, if the US
units had a line of supply the procedure would have been exactly the same since fresh units must be reduced over already
reduced units.
16.24 If a unit is already reduced it is removed from the map if
it is out of supply and in enemy territory and there are no other
fresh units on the space to take the penalty. Note both conditions must apply in order for a unit to be removed permanently.
EXAMPLE 5: Continuing from example 3, the US player
has five units in London but this time 4 of them begin the turn
already flipped. Assume also the US player does not have a
line of supply. This force still exceeds the WQ value of 3 by
two units. The US player must penalize at least 2 units and
still obey all other rules of Winter Attrition. In this case he
has to flip the single fresh unit to its reduced side and eliminate from play one of his flipped units. This is because the
flipped units meet the negative requirements of case 16.23.

21

17.0 Final Victory Levels & Instant Victory
17.1 Final Victory Levels
The Final Victory Level is achieved by subtracting
the VPs of the lowest player from the VPs of the
highest player. This number is then utilized to assess the Victory Level listed below. The VPs are
tracked as in rule 4.0.
•	 Decisive Victory: If a player has scored 20 VPs or more
he has achieved a decisive victory. In historical terms,
he has met his government’s objectives for fighting the
war. A decisive victory could lead to significant changes
in the international border.
•	 Marginal Victory: If a player has scored 10, but less than
20 VPs he has achieved a marginal victory. He may have
met some of the government’s basic objectives for winning the war but its effect on history might be minimal.
•	 Moral Victory: If a player has scored less than 10 VPs he
has achieved a moral victory. In historical terms its effect
on peace negotiations would be negligible. For all intents
and purposes, he has achieved the historical outcome.
•	 Stalemate: If the marker is at “0”, the players can congratulate themselves on a game well played. This would
be stalemate but is a British moral victory.

17.2 Tournament Play
For tournament purposes, since stalemates are not encouraged,
the “0” Victory Level is a British moral victory. In historical
terms the British war aim was to contain US forces and preserve Canada. In game terms related to history this would have
resulted in the historical Treaty of Status Quo.

17.3 Instant Victory Conditions
17.31 US Instant Victory: If the US player controls the fortress
city of Quebec in 1812 or 1813 the game immediately ends.
The US player wins a decisive victory.
17.32 British Instant Victory: If the British player controls any
three of the four spaces of Albany, Pittsburgh, Ft. MacArthur
and Mansfield the game immediately ends. The British player
wins a decisive victory.
DESIGN NOTE: The instant victory conditions are meant
to show that if one side was that far enough ahead in territorial claims the other side would sue for peace.

16.25 A unit(s) in friendly territory that is already reduced
before Winter Attrition takes no further losses during this step,
even if it is out of supply. However a unit without a reduced side
that is required to take a step loss would be eliminated (3.17).
16.26 A ‘0’ space cannot sustain any units in winter for either
side. This includes the three ‘0’ spaces in Upper Canada. Land
units (not leaders) are destroyed if it has to winter on one of
those spaces.
© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

22

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

INDEX
Activating Units...........................................................8.6
Amphibious Attacks..................................................11.5
Battle..................... (see Land Combat & Naval Combat)
Battle Cards....................................8.31(7), 10.43, 10.62
Building Naval Units.................................................15.1
British Regulars.......................................................10.44
Brock (Leader)...........................................................3.41
Campaign Cards...........................................................8.7
Class (Quality)..................................................3.12, 3.22
Clear Spaces...............................................................2.12
Colored Dots on Units...............................................3.15
Combat (Land)...........................................................10.0
Combat (Naval).........................................................12.0
Commanding Leader...............................................10.42
Command Limits.......................................................3.33
Continue Combat.......................................................10.6
Control of Town.........................................2.4, 4.14, 4.33
Detachments..............................................................3.14
Dragoons....................................................................3.62
End of Game VP Penalties..........................................4.3
Entering Enemy Occupied Spaces..............................9.3
Event Card VPs..........................................................4.18
First Player Determination.........................................7.33
Forest Spaces.............................................................2.11
Forts............................................................................2.7
Attacking Combat Results.....................................2.77
Building..................................................................2.74
In Combat...............................................................2.75
Increased Defense..................................................2.71
Indians in................................................................2.76
Kingston & Sackets Harbour Special....................2.73
Lead Units in with mixed class......................10.32 (v)
Free Naval Return.............................................7.4, 11.23
Free Naval Withdrawal..........................7.4, 11.21, 11.22
Head of Navigation......................................................2.3
Holding Cards...................................................7.34, 7.35
Indians..........................................................................3.7
Instant Victory Conditions.........................................17.3
Kingston Harbor........................................................2.73
Lake Control.....................................................4.33, 11.4

Lake Control Box.......................................................2.4
Combat in...............................................................12.1
Free Withdrawal from............................................11.2
Free Return to.......................................................11.23
Movement cost to enter........................................11.15
Prohibition from leaving land units.....................11.34
Restrictions in Pre-war Phase............................ 6.2 (3)
Lake Huron.........................................................2.6, 4.34
Lakeside Towns.........................................................2.13
Lake Transit Box.........................................................2.5
Lake Transport...........................................................11.3
Lake VPs....................................................................4.16
Land Combat...........................................................10.0
Amphibious attacks................................................11.5
Ft. Mackinaw/Ft. St. Joseph.................................10.72
Land Combat Modifiers.........................................10.4
Land Combat Results.............................................10.5
Lead Unit in............................................................10.3
Retreats to space with enemy unit.......................10.72
Retreats by water....................................................10.8
Reduced units in...................................................10.23
Reduced units, compulsory retreat.......................10.63
Steps in performing combat...................................10.2
Land Movement.........................................................9.0
Activation of.................................................8.3 (i) (iii)
Encountering Naval units.........................................9.3
Mandatory retreat of.................................................9.5
Movement allowance of.........................................3.16
Retreat before Combat.............................................9.5
Leader Activation........................................................8.4
Lead Units..................................................................10.3
Leaders.........................................................................3.3
Leader Capture...........................................................10.9
Lower Canadian Milita Unit......................................3.63
Major Invasion Routes...............................................2.23
Major Roads...............................................................2.21
Mandatory Retreat Before Combat.............................9.5
Map Board..................................................................2.0
Map Spaces..................................................................2.1
Militia.........................................................................3.11
Montreal..........................................................2.14, 10.41
Movement Factors............................................3.15, 3.34
Mutual Fleet Return Phase..........................................7.4

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

23

INDEX
Naval Bases......................................................2.15, 15.3
Backup Naval Bases.............................................15.33
Building & Repair of ships at.....................15.2, 15.12
Destruction of.......................................................15.32
Naval Build Value (NBV)..........................................8.21
Naval Combat..........................................................12.0
Combat Results......................................................12.4
Conditions for.........................................................12.1
Naval Combat Modifiers........................................12.3
Resolution of..........................................................12.2
Striking Flag.........................................................12.41
Naval Leader Activations............................................8.5
Naval Movement......................................................11.0
Lake Transport.......................................................11.3
Lake Transport Restrictions.................................11.32
Retreat of Naval Units............................................12.5
Naval Reinforcements...............................................14.4
Naval Units.................................................................3.2
Building.....................................................15.13, 15.17
Repairing...................................................15.13, 15.21
Northwest Company Indian Unit..............................3.61
Operational Point Value (OPV).................................8.21
Paths......................................................................2.2, 9.2
Prewar Sequence..........................................................6.0
Rank...........................................................................3.35
Reaction Cards......................................................8.13(8)
Reduced Units..........................................................3.16
Attacker....................................10.23, 10.32 (2), 10.63
Defender..............................................10.32 (3), 10.63
Non-Eligibility to attack.......................................10.23
Non-Eligibility as Lead Unit..........................10.32 (2)
Priority for Loss.............................................10.32 (1)
Winter Attrition for...............................................16.23
Regulars.....................................................................3.11
Reinforcements........................................................14.0
Land Leaders appearance at.................................14.34
Naval Leaders appearance at...............................14.43
Reinforcement Spaces............................................2.16
Reinforcement Spaces...............................................2.16
Repair of Naval Units................................................15.2
Replacement Leaders...................................................3.4
Retreats......................................................................10.7
Retreats by Water.......................................................10.8
Retreat Before Combat................................................9.4

Sackets Harbour.........................................................2.73
Sequence of Play.........................................................7.0
Setting up the Game....................................................5.0
Strategy Cards...........................................................8.0
1812 Deck preparation.............................................7.2
1814 Deck preparation...........................................7.25
As Battle Cards................................................8.37 (7)
As Event Cards..........................................4.17, 8.3 (1)
As Reaction Cards............................................8.28 (8)
Battle of New Orleans Card................................4.23
Campaign Cards................................ 8.31 (EXAMPLE)
Card Draw................................................................6.2
Card Deal...............................................................7.21
Card Explanation......................................................8.1
Composition of Deck...............................................5.2
Declaration of War Card.......................................6.2
Leader Activation with Campaign...........................8.7
Left Over Cards........................................................5.2
Naval Build Value............................................8.31 (4)
Treaty of Ghent....................................4.21, 4.22, 7.25
Supply.......................................................................13.0
Supply Depots........................................................13.5
Supply Lines...........................................................13.3
Supply Sources.......................................................13.2
Tecumseh............................................................3.5, 8.44
Trails..........................................................................2.22
Victory Levels (Final)................................................17.1
Victory Points..............................................................4.0
Victory Point Check.....................................................7.5
Winter Attrition..........................................................16.2
Winter Turns..............................................................16.0
Winter Quartering Value............................................2.17

© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

24

Mr. Madison’s War Rule Book

Credits

Special Thanks

Designer: Gilbert Collins
Developer: Dave Stiffler
Researcher: Gilbert Collins
Art Director, Cover Art and Package Design:
Rodger B. MacGowan
Cover Art: Cover paintings by Peter Rindlisbacher
Map Art: Knut Grünitz
Counter Art: Charles Kibler & Knut Grünitz
Other Internal Components’ Graphics: Charles Kibler
Playtesters: Matthew Collins, Randy Pippus, Larry
Sisson, Mark Benninger, Ron Jacobsen, David Stiffler,
Jim Lawler, Rod Coffey, Michel Boucher, Harry Martin,
Mike Fauteux, Kevin McPartland, Jerry Shile, and
Brice Feal
Proofreaders: Hans Korting, Randy Pippus, Michel
Boucher, Eric Guttag, Freddy Dekker
Production Coordination: Tony Curtis
Producers: Tony Curtis, Rodger MacGowan, Andy
Lewis, Gene Billingsley & Mark Simonitch

My thanks to Matt Collins who was responsible for giving
us the beautiful play test map and to Mark Benninger who
created the Vassal Module.
Extra special thanks to marine artist Peter Rindlisbacher
who graciously allowed us to use some of his fabulous
paintings for the game box cover art, for Event cards 19,
20, 31, 39, 94, 97, 106, and throughout the Play Book.
Special thanks to developer Dave Stiffler, and artists
Rodger B. MacGowan, Mark Simonitch, Knut Grünitz
and Charles Kibler.
Thanks to Dave and Sue Grassly of Floral City Images,
Monroe Michigan for the photo on Event card 26.

GMT Games, LLC

P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
© 2012 GMT Games, LLC

