Goal Card

by Frederic Moyersoen
Players: 3-10	

Ages: 8 and up 	 Playing time: about 30 minutes

7

Game Pieces:

44 Path Cards 	

27 Action Cards 	

28 Gold Nugget Cards 	

7 Gold Miners 	 4 Saboteurs

The Goal of the Game
The players are dwarves—either gold miners working their tunnels ever-deeper into the mountains in
search of treasure, or saboteurs trying to put obstacles in the miners’ path. The members of each group
should work together, but often they can only guess who their allies are! If the gold miners can make a
path to the treasure, they are rewarded with nuggets of gold while the saboteurs leave empty-handed.
If the gold miners fail, it is the saboteurs who reap the reward! But, the identity of each dwarf is not
revealed until the gold is split up. After three rounds, the dwarf with the most nuggets wins!

6

Nothing makes the heart of a dwarf race quite like a nice shiny gold nugget. As one of these intrepid folk, you
naturally want to collect as much of the yellow stuff as you can. But are you a gold digger… or a saboteur?

Preparation
Separate the cards into path, action, nugget, and dwarf cards.
The number of gold miner and saboteur cards used depends on the number of players (put the remaining
dwarf cards back in the box—they will not be needed for the rest of the game):
3 players: 1 saboteur and 3 gold miners 	
4 players: 1 saboteur and 4 gold miners 	
5 players: 2 saboteurs and 4 gold miners 	
6 players: 2 saboteurs and 5 gold miners 	

•	
•	
•	
•	

7 players: 3 saboteurs and 5 gold miners
8 players: 3 saboteurs and 6 gold miners
9 players: 3 saboteurs and 7 gold miners
10 players: all dwarf cards

Shuffle the required numbers of gold miners and saboteurs together. Deal one card to each player, who
looks at it and puts it face down in front of him without revealing his role to the other players. The last
card is set aside (also face down) until the end of the round.

5

•	
•	
•	
•	

Find the one start card (showing a ladder) and three goal cards (one with the gold treasure and two with
mere stones) from among the 44 path cards. Shuffle the goal cards and place them face down on the
table, together with the start card (face up), as shown in the illustration below. Over the course of the
game, a maze of pathways will be created between the start card and the finish cards. Note that these
pathways may extend beyond the borders of the 5 by 9 card pattern indicated in the illustration.

face-down goal card

one card length’s space

4

Quick game setup: Use the scale on
the right side of the game rules to
measure the distance between start
and goal card.

seven card widths’ space

start card

face-down goal card

• 3 to 5 players: Each player is dealt 6 cards.
• 6 to 7 players: Each player is dealt 5 cards.
• 8 to 10 players: Each player is dealt 4 cards.

one card length’s space

face-down goal card

3

Add all the action cards to the remaining 40 path cards and shuffle
to create one draw pile. Deal out a number of cards to each player,
again depending on the number of players in the game:

Put the rest of the deck next to the goal cards.
Shuffle the gold nugget cards and place them face down next to the
leftover dwarf card.
The youngest player takes the first turn, with play passing to the left.

On his turn, a player must first play 1 card.
This means either: 	- Add 1 path card to the maze; or
	
- Place 1 action card in front of any player; or
	
- Pass, by putting 1 card face down on the discard pile.

stock and
discard pile

Then, the player must draw the top card off the path deck and add it to his hand. This ends his turn, and
play passes to the next player.

2

How to play

Note: When the draw deck is used up, the players do not draw cards anymore—a turn then consists only
of playing a card.

Playing a Path Card

1
Start Card

W

R

O

N

G

W

R

O

N

G

The path cards are used to build a path from the start
card to the goal cards. They can only ever be played by
connecting to a path card that’s already on the table
(including the start card). All paths on the sides of the
new card must fit with the other cards already in play,
and they can never be played crosswise (see the illustration).
Important: Newly placed path cards must always have an
uninterrupted connection to the start card!
Playing Hint: The gold miners will try to build an uninterrupted path
from the start card to one of the goal cards while the saboteurs will
try to prevent just that. However, you should not be too obvious, or
your identity will be guessed very easily!

Playing an Action Card
Action cards are always played face up in front of a player (yourself or another player). Action cards can
be used to hinder or help the players, remove a card from the pathway maze, or gain information about
the goal cards.
Broken Tools: If one of these cards is in front of a player, he may not
play any path cards—of course he may still play other cards! At any
time, only one card of each type can be in front of a given player.
A player can only add a path card to the maze if there is no such card
in front of him at the beginning of his turn.
Fix Tools: These cards are used to repair broken tools—in other words to
remove one of the broken tool cards from in front of a player. They can
be played on oneself or on another player. Either way, both the repair
card and the broken tool card are placed in the discard pile. Of course,
the repair card must match the type of broken tool. For example, if there
is a broken mine cart in front of a player, it can only be repaired by an
unbroken cart, not by a lantern or pick card.
Some repair cards show 2 tools. If one of these cards is played, it can
be used to repair either one of the tools shown, not both.

Important: All repair cards can only be played if the matching broken tool card already lies in front of the player.
Rockfall: This card is always played in front of the player, who may then take 1 path card of
his choice (except the start and goal cards) out of the maze of pathways and put it in the
discard pile (together with the rockfall card). Gaps created in this way can be filled with an
appropriate path card during a later turn.
Playing Hint: A saboteur can use this card to interrupt a path from the start card or a gold
miner can remove a dead end, providing a new route for the path.
Map: When a player plays this card, he carefully picks up one of the three goal cards, looks
at it, then puts it back in its place and places the map on the discard pile. He now knows
whether or not it is worth digging a path to that goal card (since only one of the three
shows the treasure)!

Passing
If a player cannot or does not want to play a card, he must pass by putting 1 card from his hand
facedown on the discard pile without showing it to the other players. If players pass, there will be
face up and face down cards in the discard pile—that’s okay!
Note: Towards the end of a round, there is a chance that some players will have no cards left in hand—
in which case they must pass (without discarding, of course).

The End of a Round
face-down
goal card

If a player plays a path card that touches a goal card and creates an uninterrupted
path from the start card to that goal card he must turn that goal card over:
•	 If it is the treasure card, the round is over!
•	 If it is a stone, the round continues. The face up goal card is placed next to
	 the last path card played so that the paths fit.
Note: In rare cases, it is possible that the goal card cannot be played in such
a way that all the paths fit the adjacent path cards. As an exception to the
general rule, this is legal—but only for the goal card.
The round also ends if the draw deck runs out of cards and no player has any
playable cards left in hand.
When the round ends, all dwarf cards are turned over: Who was a gold miner,
and who’s a saboteur?

goal card
with
treasure

Handing Out the Gold
The gold miners win the round if there is an uninterrupted path from the
start card to the goal card that shows the treasure. If they do, the player who
played the last path card (that connected to the treasure) draws a number of
gold nugget cards (face down) equal to the number of gold miners (e.g.,
5 cards if there were 5 gold-diggers), looks at them in secret, and chooses
1 card to keep. Then, he passes the rest of gold nugget cards counterclockwise to the next gold miner (not saboteur!), who also chooses
1 card and passes the rest—and so on until each gold miner gets 1 card.

The saboteurs have won the round if the goal card with the treasure wasn’t reached. If there was only
1 saboteur, he gets gold nugget cards from the deck worth a total of four nuggets. If there were 2 or 3
saboteurs, they each get 3 nuggets worth of gold. If there were 4 saboteurs, each gets 2 nuggets.
All players keep their gold nugget cards secret until the end of the game!
Note: In a game with 3 or 4 players, it is possible that there will be no saboteur during a round. In this
case, if the treasure is not reached, none of the dwarves get any gold nuggets!

A New Round Begins
After the gold nuggets are handed out, it’s time for the next round. Place the start card and goal cards
on the table, just like at the beginning of the game. Shuffle the same dwarf cards as before (including
the one that was set aside) and deal them out again. Shuffle the path and action cards, creating a new
draw deck, and deal the starting hands.
Of course, the players keep their gold nuggets from the earlier rounds. The rest of the gold nugget cards
are shuffled again and place next to the extra dwarf card.
The player to the left of the one who played the last path card in the previous round starts the next
round.

End of the Game
The game ends after 3 rounds. Each player counts the gold nuggets on all of his gold nugget cards. The
player with the most nuggets wins the game! If there is a tie, they share the win.

If you have comments, questions, or suggestions, please contact us:
AMIGO Spiel + Freizeit GmbH, Waldstraße 23-D5, D-63128 Dietzenbach
www.amigo-spiele.de, E-Mail: redaktion@amigo-spiele.de

© AMIGO Spiel + Freizeit GmbH, D-63128 Dietzenbach, MMIV	

Version 2.0

