is!

lant
Escape from At

Game Rules

I

t’s early in the 20th century - a time of exploration and adventure. The mysterious island of Atlantis has been discovered in
the middle of the ocean, and there are rumors of riches! After
reaching Atlantis, the explorers are ready to return home with
treasure and artifacts. But Atlantis begins to sink!
Who will manage to reach dry land?

Goal

At the end of the game, flip over all of the Explorer tokens you
have managed to get to safe isles and total the points printed on
the bottom of these Explorers. The player with the highest total
(and not necessarily the most Explorers saved) wins the game.

Contents
• 

• 1 game board;
• 40 Terrain tiles (16 Beach tiles, 16 Forest tiles
and 8 Mountain tiles);
• 40 Explorer tokens (10 of each color);
• 5 Sea Serpent tokens;
• 6 Shark tokens;
• 5 Whale tokens;
• 12 Ship tokens;
• 1 Creature dice;
• 1 Rulebook.

2

Game Setup

1. Place the 5 Sea Serpent tokens on the spaces of the board with
the Sea Serpent symbol in them.
2. Shuffle the Terrain tiles face up (showing the Beach, Forest or
Mountain side), and place them randomly on the black-bordered
sea spaces of the game board. This way, you’ll create an island
made of Beach, Forest and Mountain tiles with a Sea Serpent
placed on a sea space in the middle.
3. Each player chooses a color and takes the 10 corresponding
Explorer tokens.

4. Each player gets 2 Ship tokens.
5. The remaining Ship tokens, as well as the Shark and Whale
tokens are set aside for the moment (they will come into play during the game).
6. Choose or randomly select the player who will play first (quite
logically called “first player” from here on).
Under each of your Explorer tokens is a number from 1 to 6.
Take a good look at your tokens, but don’t reveal those numbers
to the other players. Try to remember throughout the game where
you place each of them during setup, as the higher the number
is, the more points the explorer is worth when you manage to get
the token to a safe isle, as this number represents the amount of
treasures the explorer carries with him.
7. Starting with the first player and proceeding clockwise, the players
each place an Explorer token on an empty Terrain tile (meaning a
Terrain tile which doesn’t contain an Explorer token). Take care not
to reveal the numbers printed on your Explorer tokens when you
place them. Placement continues until each player has placed all 10 of
their Explorer tokens. When playing with less than four players, some
Terrain tiles will remain empty.
8. Starting with the first player and proceeding clockwise, the
players in turn place one of their Ship tokens on a free sea space
(meaning that a space that doesn’t contain a Ship token or a Sea
Serpent token) adjacent to a Terrain tile. The placement continues
until each player has placed both of their Ship tokens.

Important Note About Explorer Tokens

Once the game has begun, you can no longer look at or reveal
the value of your Explorer tokens, even if they’ve reached a safe
isle or have been removed from the game.

Game Overview
The players will now, starting with the first player and proceeding clockwise, take their turns.
During your game turn, you must perform these actions in order:

1. Play a Terrain tile from your “hand”

Once and once per turn only, you may play a Terrain tile you’ve
obtained during a previous round. Naturally, you’ll skip this step during your first turn as well as on any turn in which you don’t have a
Terrain tile “in hand”.

2. Move your Explorer
and/or Ship tokens
You may move any combination of Explorer and/or Ship tokens. You
are allowed three spaces of movement in total, on land or sea. For
example, you can move two Explorer tokens one space each to get
them onto a Ship, and then move the Ship in question one space.
The goal is to get your Explorers onto the Ships and get them to
neighboring isles. Read the “Moving Explorers and Ships” section
later for more details.

3. Remove a Terrain Tile

You must carefully remove a Terrain tile from the island. Any
Explorer on that tile is now on the sea space it previously occupied. Take a look at the back of the tile without showing it to
other players and refer to the “Using Information from a Terrain
Tile” section later on for more details.
You must respect two conditions when you remove a Terrain tile.
First, you must choose a tile adjacent to at least one sea space
(even if it’s a space which previously had a Terrain tile). Second,
all of the Beach tiles must be removed first, followed by the Forest
tiles, and finally the Mountain tiles – this is to represent the
Terrain being closer to the sea sinking first. If a Beach tile is completely surrounded by Forest and/or Mountain tiles, remove
it as the last Beach tile (even if it not adjacent to a sea space).
The same goes for any Forest tile surrounded by Mountains.

3

4. Roll the die and move a creature

You must roll the Creature die.
Then, you may move a Creature (Sea Serpent, Shark or Whale)
corresponding to the die result and already on the game board
one or more sea spaces in order to attack another player or protect
one of your own Explorers. Read the “Using a Die Result” section
below for more details.

Using a Die Result

The Sea Serpents, Sharks and Whales have no effect on each other.
They can occupy the same sea space. If the Creature rolled isn’t
present on the board, nothing happens.

Sea Serpent
If the die result is a Sea Serpent, move one of these
creatures one sea space. If the Sea Serpent enters a sea space
occupied by a Ship containing passengers, remove that Ship
and any passengers from the game. Also remove any Swimmers
on the sea space. If it was an empty ship, it remains in play.

Moving Explorers and Ships
Explorers on Land

• You can move an Explorer token from a Terrain tile to an adjacent Terrain tile, even if the latter is already occupied by one or
more Explorer tokens.
• You can move an Explorer token from a Terrain tile to a Ship
located on an adjacent sea space.
• You can move an Explorer token from a Ship to another Ship on
an adjacent sea space.
• You can move an Explorer token onto a Ship already occupied
by Explorers of another color (but no more than 3 per Ship).
• You cannot move another player’s Explorer tokens.
• Once an Explorer token leaves the island (by getting on a Ship or
becoming a Swimmer), it can no longer return onto a Terrain tile.

Explorers on Sea (Swimmers)

Shark
If the die result is a Shark, move one of these creatures
one or two sea spaces. If the Shark enters a sea space occupied by
one or more Swimmers, the Shark’s movement ends. Remove all
Swimmers from the sea space when the Shark has stopped. If the
space on which the Shark is contains a Ship, the Shark doesn’t affect
it (or any passengers it may have).

• Explorer tokens become Swimmers when they move into a sea
space from an adjacent Terrain tile, when they jump from a Ship
into the sea space on which that ship is, when they fall into a sea
space when a Terrain tile is removed, or when a Whale capsizes
their Ship and makes them fall into the sea space it occupied.

Whale
If the die result is a Whale, move one of these
creatures one to three sea spaces. If the Whale enters a sea space
occupied by a Ship containing one or more passengers, its movement ends: the Ship is removed from the game and its passengers
become Swimmers. If the sea space also contained a Shark, the
Swimmers are removed from the game. A Whale
doesn’t affect Swimmers or empty Ships on the
same sea space as itself.

• You may not move a Swimmer from a sea space into a Boat in an
adjacent sea space (since this would be considered 2 movements, and
a Swimmer may move only one sea space in a turn). You can only
move a Swimmer onto a Ship when they occupy the same sea space.

4

• You can move a Swimmer only one sea space on your turn.
When a Swimmer goes from a Terrain tile or Ship into a sea
space, it’s considered to be a movement of one sea space.

• A sea space can hold multiple Swimmers.
• If you move a Swimmer into a sea space
containing a Sea Serpent or a Shark, the
Swimmer is immediately removed from
the game. Consequently, Swimmers
cannot cross that kind of sea spaces.

Ships

• When a Ship is empty, any player
can move it from one sea space
to another, as desired (at the cost
of one movement per space).
• A given sea space can only contain one Ship at any time.
• Each Ship can only carry a maximum of three Explorer tokens
(regardless of color).
• When a Ship contains Explorers belonging to more than a single
player, it’s the player with the most Explorers on board who
controls the Ship. When you control a Ship, you’re the only one
who can move it.
• When multiple players have the same number of Explorers in a
Ship, each player controls the Ship.
• If you move a Ship containing one or more Explorers into a sea
space containing a Sea Serpent or a Whale, the Ship is immediately removed from the game, its passengers becoming Swimmers
(don’t forget that if the sea space contains a Shark or Sea Serpent,
these Swimmers are immediately removed from the game).

Reaching a Safe Isle

• Explorers can disembark from a Ship placed on one of the two
sea spaces adjacent to one of the safe isles. Each Explorer token
leaving the Ship costs one movement. The Ship remains on the
same sea space until moved again.
• Moving a Swimmer onto a safe isle from one of the two adjacent
sea spaces costs one movement.
• Your Explorers can disembark on any safe isle, not just the one
in front of you.

Tiles to be Played Immediately (green outline)

If you see one of these icons, immediately reveal the tile to the
other players, perform the actions given below, and then remove
the Terrain tile from the game.
Take a Shark token that had been set aside
and place it on the sea space that had been
occupied by the Terrain tile. Any Swimmer
on that sea space is removed from the game.

Take a Whale token that had been set aside
and place it on the sea space that had been
occupied by the Terrain tile.

 ake a Ship token that had been set aside and
T
place it on the sea space that had been occupied by the Terrain tile. If that sea space contained one or more Swimmers, place them on
board the Ship. If the sea space contained more
than three Swimmers, it’s the player who has
revealed the Terrain tile who chooses which
ones get on board.
Whirlpool: remove from the game all
Swimmers, Sea Serpents, Sharks, Whales,
Ships and Explorers from the sea space the
Terrain tile used to occupy, as well as from
all adjacent sea spaces.
Volcanic Eruption: refer to the “End of
Game” section later for more details.

Using Information
from a Terrain Tile
When you remove a Terrain tile (step #3 from the
Game Overview, seen previously), discreetly
look underneath it without showing it to the
other players. There are three types of tiles,
each of which is played differently:
1. To be played immediately.
2. To be played at the beginning of your turn.
3. To be played outside of your turn
(defensively).

5

 iles to be Played
T
at the Beginning of your Turn (red outline)
If you see one of these icons, place the tile face down in front of you
(in your “hand” of tiles). Then, once per turn, during step #1 of your
game turn, as indicated in the Game Overview section, you can play
one (and only one) of these tiles from your hand.
Once a tile is played in this manner, remove it from the game.
A dolphin comes to help one of your
Swimmers! Move one of your Swimmers
1 to 3 sea spaces.

The winds favor you! Move a Ship you control 1 to 3 sea spaces.

 iles to be Played
T
Outside of your Turn (defensively) (red outline)

Move the Sea Serpent of your choice (already
present on the game board) to any vacant sea
space of your choice.

Finally, if you see one of these icons, place the tile face down
in front of you (in your “hand” of tiles), as the side with the
icon should remain hidden. These tiles can only be played during another player’s turn, and not on your own. They are considered to be “defense” tiles, as they are played in reaction to a
creature’s movement made by an opponent. Once such a tile has
been played, remove it from the game. Here’s how they should
be resolved:

Move the Shark of your choice (already present on the game board) to any vacant sea
space of your choice.

When another player moves a Shark onto a
sea space occupied by one of your Swimmers,
you can play this Terrain tile to remove the
Shark from the game (before your Swimmer
is removed from the game by the Shark). All
Swimmers remain in the sea space.

Move the Whale of your choice (already present on the game board) to any vacant sea
space of your choice.

When another player moves a Whale onto a
sea space occupied by one of your Ships, you
can play this Terrain tile to remove the Whale
from the game (before it gets to capsize your
Ship). Your Ship remains in the sea space.

End of Game

Under one of the Mountain tiles is a volcano icon. As soon as this
tile is revealed, a volcanic eruption destroys what remains of the
island as well as any Explorers who haven’t reached safe isles. The
game ends. At the end of the game, flip over all of the Explorer
tokens you have managed to get to safe isles and add up the number of points printed on them. It’s the player with the highest
total (and not necessarily the most Explorers saved) who wins the
game. It’s possible that you might not have any Explorers left to
move while the game is not yet over. In that case, continue playing, but skip step #2 of the Game Overview (Move your Explorer
and/or Ship tokens) during your game turns.

6

Two Player Games

If you’re playing with two players, you can decide to use two colors for each
player. This will keep the island from being underpopulated and make the
game more fun. At the end of the game, total up the points earned by each
color of Explorer tokens.

Challenges

Here are a few variants, or challenges, which will add a bit of variety and
complexity to the game.

Challenge #1: Overpopulated!

During the game setup, the players can place up to two Explorer tokens on
Terrain tiles, except for those adjacent to sea spaces, on the island’s coast, where
only one Explorer token can be placed.

Challenge #2: To the last!

The game ends when the last Explorer token is removed from the game board (by being
saved or removed by a creature or whirlpool). When the Volcanic Eruption tile is revealed,
treat it as a Whirlpool tile and continue the game if Explorer tokens remain on the board.

Challenge #3: All equal!

The winner of the game is the player with the most Explorer tokens
on the safe isles when the game ends. The numbers printed under the
tokens are ignored.

Challenge #4: Atlantis submerged!

The game ends immediately when the last Terrain tile is removed from
the board. When the Volcanic Eruption tile is revealed, treat it as a
Whirlpool tile and continue the game if any Terrain tiles remain on
the board.

Credits
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

Game Design:	 Julian Courtland-Smith
Development:	 Kevin Nesbitt and Stephen M. Buonocore
Artwork and layout:	 David Ausloos (www.ausloosdesign.be)
Production Directors:	 Stephen M. Buonocore and Kevin Nesbitt
Creatures designed by:	 Andrew White
Revision:	 Eric Franklin
30th anniversary edition artwork:	 Jean-Brice Dugait and Stéphane Gantiez
30th anniversary edition layout:	Asmodee

www.StrongholdGames.com

7

Tiles to be Played Immediately
Take a Shark token that had been
set aside and place it on the sea
space that had been occupied by the
Terrain tile. Any Swimmer on that
sea space is removed from the game.

Tiles to be Played at the
Beginning of your Turn
A dolphin comes to help one of
your Swimmers! Move one of your
Swimmers 1 to 3 sea spaces.

Take a Whale token that had
been set aside and place it on
the sea space that had been
occupied by the Terrain tile.

The winds favor you! Move a Ship
you control 1 to 3 sea spaces.

Take a Ship token that had been set aside
and place it on the sea space that had been
occupied by the Terrain tile. If that sea
space contained one or more Swimmers,
place them on board the Ship. If the sea
space contained more than three Swimmers,
it’s the player who has revealed the Terrain
tile who chooses which ones get on board.

Move the Sea Serpent of your choice
(already present on the game board)
to any vacant sea space of your choice.

Whirlpool: remove from the game
all Swimmers, Sea Serpents, Sharks,
Whales, Ships and Explorers
from the sea space the Terrain
tile used to occupy, as well as
from all adjacent sea spaces.

Move the Shark of your choice
(already present on the game board)
to any vacant sea space of your choice.

Volcanic Eruption: refer to the
“End of Game” section.

Move the Whale of your choice
(already present on the game board)
to any vacant sea space of your choice.

Tiles to be Played Outside of your Turn
When another player moves a Shark onto a
sea space occupied by one of your Swimmers,
you can play this Terrain tile to remove the
Shark from the game (before your Swimmer
is removed from the game by the Shark).
All Swimmers remain in the sea space.

tis!

tlan
rom A

ef
Escap

8

When another player moves a Whale onto a
sea space occupied by one of your Ships, you
can play this Terrain tile to remove the Whale
from the game (before it gets to capsize your
Ship). Your Ship remains in the sea space.

