The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

1

The Conquerors:
Alexander the Great
Battle Series Rules

RULE BOOK
Table of Contents
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Introduction ............................................................ 2
Components ............................................................ 2
General Course of Play .......................................... 4
Action Phase Markers (APM) ................................ 6
Leaders ................................................................... 6
Provinces ................................................................ 7
Treasuries ............................................................... 8
Manpower ............................................................... 9
Macedonian Weariness ........................................... 11

GMT Games, LLC

10. Movement ............................................................... 12
11. Combat ................................................................... 14
12. Rhodes .................................................................... 18
13. Alexandria .............................................................. 19
14. The Royal Family ................................................... 19
15. The Z Cards ............................................................ 19
16. Solitaire Play .......................................................... 24
Counter scans ................................................................. 23
Credits and Sources ........................................................ 24

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

0604

2

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

1.0 INTRODUCTION
The Conquerors: Alexander the Great is a game in which the
Macedonian Player, representing Alexander III, tries to ‘conquer
the known world’ of the 4th century, B.C. His opponent, the Persian Player, represents the ‘Great King’, Darius III. Alexander’s
campaigns were highly logistical, and the game system reflects
the importance of this factor.

2.0 COMPONENTS

DESIGN AND HISTORICAL NOTE: While we have used the
Persian satrapial form of government to provide us with ‘provinces’, we occasionally took some liberties, e.g., there was no
satrap of Phoenicia (the individual city-states, such as Tyre,
were ruled as separate entities).
We have left out some of the ‘strongholds’ that Alexander encountered in both Asia Minor and the Frontier, such as the mountain fortress at Termessos in Pisidia, which Alexander bypassed
as unassailable, mostly because his siege equipment was not
yet available.

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great contains:
•
•
•
•
•
•

The Paths indicate where there are connections between spaces.
The type of path determines how many Movement Points it costs
to move from one Space to another. There are five types of path:
Land, Mountain/Strait, Desert, Sea/Coastal, and Deep Sea.

1 22" x 32" game-map
55 cards
1 sheet of 140 1/2" cardboard markers
1 sheet of 88 5/8" markers
1 Rules Book
3 six-sided dice

2.2 Game Terminology and Acronyms
The following terms and acronyms are used throughout the rules:
Action Phase Marker (APM): The markers used for determining who goes, and when.

2.1 The Maps
The map covers the Indo-Persian Hellenistic known world of
the 4th century, B.C. Virtually all terrain has been ignored, except where it affects the movement rules.
The map is divided into Provinces. Control of Provinces is primarily important because it affects each player’s ability to replenish Treasuries.
Each Province has at least one Space. Spaces can be Minor Cities, Major Cities, Strongholds or Transit Points. The playing
pieces always use these Spaces for Movement, and all movement must end in a Space (Note: units may not end movement in
Transit Points).

ASP: Army Strength Point, a generic way of indicating the
strength of an Army or Tribe. Garrisons have Garrison Strength
Points (GSPs). Fleets use Naval Strength Points (NSPs), representing squadrons of war galleys.
Action Round: What a player can do when his APM is drawn.
Discard: Cards that have been used or played are placed in the
Discard Pile. Most Discarded cards can eventually return to play,
but some cards may only be played once per game.
DRM: A die or dice roll modifier - a number used to adjust the
die roll.

Leaders
Naval
Rating

Non-Persian
Persian
Leader
Stripe

Battle
Rating
Siege
Rating
Army Unit

Activation
Phase Marker

In Revolt

Royal
Family

Royal
Treasury

Alexandria
City

Under
Siege

Devastated

Useless

Persian
Control

Macedonian
Control

Bad
Weather

ASP

ASP
Marker

Macedonian
Weariness

Alexander
Injury

Treasury
Depleted

Tribe Unit
Built-in
leader’s
Battle
Rating

Fleet Unit

Garrison

Maximum
NSP

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

3

Elite Level: The experience and tactical expertise of a given
Army. Elite Level does not apply to Fleets, Garrisons or Tribes.

Naval Strength Points (NSPs): These indicate the combat
strength of a Fleet; they are used like ‘change.’

Frontier Provinces: Provinces not under the direct control of
Persia; e.g., Parthia and Colchis.

Armies: Each player has a maximum of three Armies. An Army
counter represents the presence of an Army on the map. Its
strength is indicated by the ASPs in that Army’s Holding Box.
Each Army has an inherent Leader with a Battle Rating of ‘0’.

Major City: Large ‘urban’ areas with strong, fortified walls.
These are identified by their hexagonal shape, as well as a number in a circle next to them.
Minor City: An area, not necessarily just a city or town, identified by the name in each circular Space on the map.
MP: Movement Points - the cost to use a Path.
PAT: ‘Play Any Time’ - an indication on a Z Card that it may be
played at times other than during a player’s Turn. All other cards
must be played in Phase C/1 of the Action Round. (EXAMPLE:
a Terrain Advantage card is played as part of a Battle.)
Strongholds: Natural, and excellent, defensive positions. Indicated by square spaces on map.
Z Cards: Event cards representing persons, places and possible
events that may or may not appear or occur during a game.

Fleets: The naval version of Armies, containing Naval Strength
Points (NSPs). Fleets are identified by who built them, their
maximum NSP capacity, and the Home Port(s) for that Fleet
(noted on the reverse side). For example, the Ionic Fleet, which
starts the game as part of the Persian navy, may use Lesbos,
Miletus, Chios, or Halicarnassus as a Home Port.
Garrisons: Used to control and defend Spaces. Each counter is
worth one (1) Garrison Strength Point (GSP).
Informational Markers: Used to keep track of various information and locations, as the rules require.
Leaders: The individuals who command armies, adding their
abilities to the Armies to which they are assigned.

2.3 The Charts and Tables

Local Tribes: Limited ‘armies’ with GSP, usually located in
Frontier provinces.

The map has several charts, tables, and boxes that are used to
help play. To keep track of a variety of items, we suggest the
following:

HISTORICAL NOTE: The Balkan tribes north of Greece and
Macedon were not a factor during Alexander’s campaigns, having been subdued by him before he left for Persia.

Alexander Injury Level: This track allows players to maintain
a record of the effect of extended campaigning and fighting on
Alexander.

2.5 The Cards

Army Holding Boxes: Place ASP markers in the corresponding
box for that Army.
ASP Available Track: Use this track to note how many ASPs
each Player has left to Raise.
Battle Resolution Table: Used to resolve land combat.
Battle/Attrition Loss Table: Used to determine how many ASPs
a player has lost.
Macedonian Weariness. This track allows players to maintain
a record of the effects of extended campaigning and fighting on
the Macedonian Army.
Siege Assault Table: Used to resolve assaults on Major Cities.

2.4 The Markers
The cardboard markers are used to represent what is in a player’s
Army, and to facilitate various record-keeping tasks (mostly to
indicate who controls a province).
Action Phase Markers (APMs): Used to determine who goes,
and when.
Army Strength Points (ASPs): These indicate the combat
strength of an Army; they are used like ‘change’.

The Z Deck contains 55 cards representing persons, places and
possible events that may or may not appear or occur during a
game. (See 15.0.)

2.6 The Dice
The Conquerors: Alexander the Great uses six-sided dice to determine the outcome of certain events. When two or three dice
are used, the rolls are added together, to get a result of 2-12 or 318, respectively.

2.7 Balance and Game Length
DESIGN NOTE: Let’s face it, folks, Alexander didn’t get to be
called ‘the Great’ because he was large. In a space of 3 years
he smashed three Persian armies and became The Great King
himself. While it wasn’t as easy as it superficially looks, the
Persians simply had the wrong army for the job (and Darius
was no Alexander). To that end, we have made some adjustments; these may not sit well with the hard-line historians, but
they give the Persians a ‘leg up’ and make the game playable...
to which is added the fact that the Persian has a bit more hindsight than Darius ever had. And he has a wealth of Talents (if
not talent) and manpower at his disposal.
With all that, if Alexander can stay alive and keep his army
intact, he will eventually win. The Persian task is to make him
overwork to the point where either Alex dies or his army simply
says “No Mas”, at which point, regardless of the score, the
Persian Player has done better than history. The more experienced player should play the Persians. In addition, you can

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

4

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

adjust the balance in favor of the Persians (albeit slightly) by
removing one of the Macedonian APMs from play ... the Macedonian superiority therein (4 to 3) reflecting their overall military and logistical superiority.
A complete game should take about 3-4 hours, as the rounds
move rather rapidly.

2. 8 Questions?

The Macedonian Fleet, consisting of Hegelochus and 3 NSPs, is
placed in Chersonese (Thrace).
The Macedonian Player may then place up to 5 Garrison Strength
Points (in total) in any of the Spaces in Europe. Garrisons must
meet stacking restrictions.

d. The Persians Deploy
The Persian Player starts with two Armies and the listed Fleets:

Any questions about play? If you’re willing to wait, send your
questions and a self-addressed stamped envelope to:
GMT Games
ATTN: Conquerors: Alexander Qs
POB 1308
Hanford, CA 93232

Army #1, consisting of Darius III, the Royal Treasury (Empty),
the Royal Family, and 42 ASPs, is placed in Susa (Susiana),
outside the City. The Elite Level of the Army is 1.
Army #2, consisting of Memnon and 40 ASPs, is placed in
Cyzicus (Mysia). The Elite Level of the Army is 1.
The Egyptian Fleet and Pharnabazus is placed in the port of
Pelusium (Egypt).

Alternatively, you can contact us by email:
Designer: bergbrog@aol.com
Developer: wframsay@aol.com
Publisher: gmtgames@aol.com

The Tyrian Fleet is placed in the port of Tyre (Phoenicia).

For ongoing online support of this game, visit our website at
www.gmtgames.com. It features a set of ‘Living Rules’ (a set of
rules that we update regularly), as well as a discussion board
where you can ask questions and get the latest tips and tricks
from the designer and developer, as well as other players.
We can also be found, along with most of the rest of the GMT
designers and developers, on ConsimWorld’s discussion boards,
at www.consimworld.com. We heartily recommend this site to
anyone interested in wargaming.

The Ionic Fleet is placed in the port of Salamis (Cyprus).
The Persian Player now places up to 30 Persian Garrison Strength
Points (in total) as he wishes, in any of the Spaces within the
provinces in the Persian Empire except for Mysia, Bithynia, and
the Frontier Provinces. Garrisons must meet stacking restrictions.

e. Independent Forces
The Rhodes Garrison (2 GSPs) and a 4 NSP Fleet is placed in
Rhodes.

f. Independent Tribes

3.0 GENERAL COURSE OF
PLAY
3.1 SETTING UP THE GAME
There are two players: the Macedonian and the Persian.

a. Leaders
The players start by setting aside the counters for Alexander III
(the Great), Antipater, and Hegelochus (Macedonian), and Darius
III, Memnon and Pharnabazus (Persian). The remaining Leader
counters for each player are placed either face down or in two
cups (one for each player), for random selection during the game.

The following tribes are placed in their spaces: the Cadusii
(Hyrcania), the Uxii (Susiana), and the Nabatanei (Arabaya).
Note that the Cadusii have 2 GSPs, while all others have 1.

g. Treasuries
All Treasuries are Full, except for the Persian Royal Treasury,
which is Empty.

h. Tracks
Set the Macedonian ASPs Available to 75, the Persian ASPs
Available to 175, the Macedonian Weariness Level to 0, and the
Alexander Injury Level to 0.

i. Activation Phase Markers (APM)

b. Z Cards
Shuffle the Z Deck, and deal 3 cards to each Player. The remaining cards are placed face down for selection throughout the game.

c. The Macedonians Deploy
The Macedonian Player starts with two Armies and one Fleet.
Army #1, consisting of Alexander III and 33 ASPs, is placed in
Perinthos in Thrace. The Elite Level of the Army is 4.
Army #2, consisting of Antipater and 15 ASPs, is placed in
Pella (outside the City), in Macedonia. The Elite level of the
Army is 2.

Historical Opening: The Macedonian player takes one of his
APMs, setting it aside. That is the game’s first APM. The rest of
the APMs are placed in an opaque cup (the APM Pool) for blind
selection.
Optional Opening: All 7 Player APMs are placed in The APM
Pool; the Admin APM is left out. A player draws one of the 7 at
random. The APM chosen indicates which player starts the game,
after which the Admin APM is immediately placed into the Pool.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

j. Province Control
The game starts with all provinces in Europe under Macedonian
control, and all Persian provinces under Persian control. Persia
also controls Lesbos, Mytilene, Chios and Naxos. Rhodes is independent, as are the Frontier Provinces (for game purposes).
Provinces without a Minor City, Major City or Stronghold space
cannot be controlled, and do not need to be controlled for any
game purpose.

3.2 THE ACTION ROUND
The Conquerors: Alexander the Great has no Game-Turns. Play
consists of alternating Action/Admin Rounds. Play proceeds until
one of the players achieves victory.
An Action Round occurs every time a Player APM is selected,
indicating that a Persian or Macedonian Phase must take place.
Each such Round is conducted according to the sequence given
below.
PLAY NOTE: The actual drawing of the APM is considered part
of the Action Round.

3.3 ACTION ROUND SEQUENCE OF PLAY
Each Action Round includes the following steps, in order:
A. APM Selection Phase
B. APM Replacement Phase
C. Player Phase
1. Play Z Card Segment
2. Draw Z Card Segment
3. Activity Segment

5

• No card may be played in the First Round of the game, except
for a card marked PAT.. PAT cards may be played in the first
round.
2. Draw Z Card Segment. Draw one Z card from the Deck (not
from the discards). No card may be drawn in the First Round of
the game.
3. Activity Segment. The Player may now do one of the following:
• Move and/or Fight with one of his Armies or Fleets
• Move and/or Fight with more than one of his Armies and/or
Fleets (if a Major Campaign Z Card was played)
• Move one Army and conduct Devastation
• Move any or all of his Leaders
• Move the Royal Family (if controlled by that Player)
• Raise new ASPs/NSPs and/or draw one additional Leader
• Reorganize the ASPs between two or more of his armies, if
they are Stacked together
• Declare an Administrative Phase (Note: this may never be done
twice in succession).
4. Siege Assault Segment. If the Player has an ongoing Siege in
progress, he may Siege Assault at this time.
5. Victory Determination Segment. Players check to see if the
Macedonian has achieved an Automatic Victory. If not, pick
another APM at random from The Pool, and start another Action
Round.

D. Administrative Phase
If the Player selects an Administrative Phase APM for an Action
Round, or chooses to undertake an Administrative Phase during
his Activity Segment, conduct the following actions, in the given
order:

Detailed Sequence of Play
A. APM Selection Phase
Either Player draws an APM from the APM Pool. (This is ignored for the game’s first Round when using the historical opening.)

B. APM Replacement Phase
The APM from the previous Round is placed back in the Pool.
(This is ignored for the game’s first Round.)

C. Player Phase
If a Player APM (Macedonian or Persian Phase) is drawn, that
Player may undertake the following:
1. Play Z Card Segment. The Player may play one Z Card, if
desired. Cards not marked Play Any Time (PAT) may only be
played at this time. Some cards may (or must) be played in coordination with certain other cards; if that is necessary, it is permissible to play more than one card. If he wishes, the player
may also Discard any number of cards without playing them.
• If the Player has 5 Cards in his hand he must either play a card
or discard a card.

1. Both Players may try to Replenish their Treasuries (7.2).
2. Both Players may remove or reduce any Garrisons (8.6).
3. All Devastated, Drought, Bad Weather, and Battle Fatigue
markers are removed. ‘Useless’ markers may be removed.
4. Alexander may build an ‘Alexandria’ (13.0).
5. If the Alexander Injury Level track is at 20 or more, Alexander undergoes an Injury Effect Check (11.3.I).
6. If necessary, the Macedonians undergo a Weariness check
(9.0).
If a player declared an Administrative Phase in the immediately
preceding Activity Segment, and then draws the Admin APM,
this APM is ignored. Another APM must be selected. Once the
new selection has been made, the Admin APM is returned to the
APM Pool.

• If the player discards, he may not play a card.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

6

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

3.4 How to Win
The Victory conditions apply solely to the Macedonian, as the
burden of victory is on him. They reflect the varied objectives
Alexander appears to have had during his campaigns.

MACEDONIAN VICTORY
The Macedonian Player wins the game automatically if he satisfies all of the following 3 objectives at the conclusion of any
Action Round:
1. Become the Great King. To do this he must do all of the following:
• Control the provinces of Lydia (Sardes is the capital of Persian Asia Minor), Babylonia, Media, Susiana (Susa is the capital of the Achæmenid Empire), and Persis.
• Capture or Kill Darius III.
• Become King of Asia. He does this by having Alexander end
an Action Round in Gordium (Phrygia), where he cuts the
Gordian Knot (thereby fulfilling the supposed prophecy, perhaps invented ex post facto, that he who did so would become
King of Asia).
• Gain control of the Royal Family and marry a Persian Princess.
PLAY NOTE: The ability to play several of the Z cards rests
upon Alexander becoming Great King.
2. Maintain Hegemony of Greece. He must control all European provinces, none of which may be in Revolt.
3. Establish his Deity. He does this by:
• Controlling Egypt (where, as de facto Pharaoh, he becomes
“The Living God”).
• Building Alexandria in Egypt.
• Having Alexander end an Action Round in Siwa (Egypt). (HISTORICAL NOTE: His visit to the Oracle of Amun at the Siwa
Oasis was followed by the announcement that he was the son
of Zeus.)
• Invoking the act of Proskynesis as mandatory. He does this
either by playing the ‘Proskynesis’ Z card, or by using an entire Action Round to do so (during which no movement, combat or recruiting is allowed), after he has become Great King.
If he does it as an action, the Army incurs one Weariness Point
and the card is removed from play.

PERSIAN VICTORY
The Persian Player wins if Alexander dies before the Macedonian
can win. The Persian Player can also win if the Macedonians
fail a Weariness Check and subsequent die roll for Persian Victory (9.0).

4.0 ACTION PHASE
MARKERS (APM)
There are two types of APMs: 7 Player APMs (4 Macedonian
Phase and 3 Persian Phase), and one (1) Admin Phase APM.
APMs are used to determine who goes next, and what may happen. To do this, the players put all the available APMs into the
APM Pool at the start of play to be selected at random, except
for one Macedonian APM held out at the start of the game to
indicate that the Macedonians go first (when using the historical
opening). In Phase A, one player (it doesn’t matter which) draws
an APM from The Pool. The selected APM from the previous
round is then returned to the Pool in Phase B. Each APM selected starts a new Action Round, and denotes the active player
for the Action Round. There are no ‘Game-Turns’ as such in the
game, neither is there a set number of Action Rounds.
PLAY NOTE: There are always 7 APMs available in the APM
Pool for selection; the 8th is always outside, having just been
used.
If one player’s APM is drawn three times in a row, the opposing
player gets to undertake a free Action Round when the third is
drawn. After the free Round is completed, the originally drawn
APM is undertaken. Note that drawing an Admin APM does not
interrupt such a ‘threepeat’ sequence.
EXAMPLE: Two Macedonian APMs have been drawn in a row.
The next APM drawn is the Admin APM. If the next APM drawn
is another Macedonian APM, it is considered to be the third in
a row. In this case, the third Macedonian APM is temporarily
set aside and the Persian player gets a ‘free’ Action Round.
Once the Persian Action Round is over, the previously drawn
Macedonian APM takes effect.
Important: The APM last selected is not returned to the Pool
until the next APM is selected. Thus, no single APM marker can
be drawn twice in succession.

5.0 LEADERS
5.1 Leader Counters
All Armies and Fleets have inherent Leaders with a
Battle and Naval rating of ‘0’. Leader counters provide additional capabilities for these units, in terms
of rating points. Leaders may be assigned only to
Armies or Fleets. They may not be assigned to individual ASP
counters.
Each Leader counter contains at least one of the following ratings/capabilities:
Battle Rating—Land Battle Capability: This is a DRM for Land
Battles, and whenever use of the Battle Rating is called for.
Naval Rating—Naval Battle Capability: Used as a DRM when
resolving Naval Combat.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great
Each player starts the game with certain Leaders. Other Leaders
become available only when drawn at random during an Action
Round.
When a player wishes to add a Leader, he does so as part of a
Recruit action in his Action Phase for that APM. He places his
available Leaders in a cup and draws one from that pool, placing
him wherever he wishes.
A player is only obliged to reveal a Leader when it is assigned to
an Army or Fleet. Otherwise, the player may keep that Leader in
his ‘Hand’.
Persian Leaders are designated as being Persian or non-Persian,
the reasons for which become clear when you use the ‘Satrapial
Insubordination’ Z Card (see 15.0 for detailed descriptions of
the Z Cards).

5.2 Overall Command
The Overall Commander (OC) for each side is that country’s
King. For Macedon it is Alexander III. For the Persians, at least
at the start of the game, it is Darius (also the) III, The Great
King.
A player’s OC is always in command of that side’s #1 Army. In
addition, no other army may be larger, in terms of ASPs, than
the #1 Army. If, for whatever reason, a player’s #1 Army strength
falls below this level, that player may not undertake any other
action with another Army until he brings Army #1 up to strength.

5.3 The Great King
The Great King at the start of the game is Darius III. If Darius is
killed, the Persian Player may anoint in his place any Leader he
has in his hand or in Play, as long as the Persian player controls
at least one Treasure City. The Persian may not appoint a new
Great King if Alexander becomes Great King, or the Persian
controls no Treasure Cities..
HISTORICAL NOTE: When Darius fled after the battle of
Gaugamela (Assyria, 331 BC), he was assassinated by Bessus.
Bessus assumed the title as Artaxerxes IV, only to be handed
over to Alexander by Spitamenes ... who then promptly revolted.

7

so, for play purposes, we consider them Frontier.
Each province has at least one Space, not including Transit Points.
Major City. These spaces may not be attacked by land battle if
there are ASPs or GSPs Inside: instead, they must be taken by
Siege (or Surrender). Major cities have a + or - number in a
circle next to their location. This indicates their defensive DRM
when besieged.
Stronghold. These are cities built in naturally strong positions
which greatly increase the defensive capability of the defenders.
They may not be besieged; units in strongholds must be attacked
by regular land battle.
Port. Any Space to which a Sea Path runs is considered a Port.
Lesbos, Mytilene, Chios, and Naxos. These islands are not provinces, nor are they part of any province. Occupation/control confers only port capabilities and uninterrupted naval movement.

6.2 Provincial Control
Provincial control is necessary for:
• Victory (Macedonian Player)
• Replenishing Treasuries (both Players)
• Raising ASPs (both Players).
A Player controls a province under one of the following conditions:
1. He is the sole Player to have an Army or Garrison in that
province.
2. He is the sole Player to have a Fleet in a Port of that province,
and there are no enemy Armies or Garrisons in the province.
Fleets do not allow you to place a garrison.
The presence of Tribes has no effect on control of a province.
Devastation and Drought have no effect on Control. Provinces
in Revolt are controlled by neither player.
Players should use the Control markers to indicate who controls
a province, although they may not be necessary in some areas of
the map, as control will be obvious.
PLAY NOTE: If a player controls a province because he has a
garrison, and that garrison is removed (for whatever reason),
he loses control of that province.

6.0 PROVINCES
6.1 Land
The land mass is divided into Provinces. Islands are not provinces unless they are listed on the Revolt table.

6.3 Revolts
A Revolt may occur in any province listed on the
Revolt Table with a numerical Revolt Rating. Revolts are triggered by the play of a Z Card.

EXAMPLE: Crete and Cyprus are provinces; Lesbos and Chios
are not.
Provinces belong to one of the three “political” divisions:
Europe: Province boundary in Green.
Frontier Provinces: Province boundary in light yellow.
Persian Empire: All other provinces.

A generic Revolt card allows the player to choose in which province he wishes to attempt to foment revolt.

DESIGN NOTE: Some of the Frontier provinces were part of
the Persian Empire. However, the Achæmenid writ did not extend across the Zagros Mountains in anything other than name;

When an opportunity to foment Revolt arises, the player consults the Revolt Table, names his province of choice, and rolls
one die. If the die roll is less than or equal to that province’s

Some cards specify the province. Those cards usually require no
die roll, as Revolt is automatic.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

8

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

Revolt Rating, that province is now In Revolt. Place an In Revolt marker in the Province. Army and Fleet markers remain,
but any garrisons are removed.
Provinces In Revolt are not controlled by either player. They
may not be used for Treasury Replenishment. The Macedonian
Player may not consider provinces his for victory purposes while
they are In Revolt.
To Quell a Revolt, and (re)gain control of that province, either
player must end movement in any Space in the Province with an
Army whose total ASP Strength is equal to or greater than three
times (3x) the province’s Revolt Range, at which point the In
Revolt marker is removed. (Thus, it would require an Army of at
least 9 ASP to quell a Revolt in Armenia, which has a Revolt
Rating of 3.)
Frontier Provinces may not Revolt.
PLAY NOTE: Initially, it may seem that any revolt in Greece is
a waste of time. However, remember that Alexander must maintain control of all European provinces to win.

7.0 TREASURIES
7.1 Treasuries
There are eight (8) Treasure Cities on the map. These function
as Supply Depots, providing the financial backing and materiel
needed for military campaigns. There is also the Persian Royal
Treasury marker, which may move and be used for local, instant
‘supply’. In order to Raise ASPs and NSPs, and to engage in
land combat at full strength, a player must have a Line of Communication back to one of his Treasuries.
The Macedonian Treasury is in Pella. All Macedonian LOCs
must be traced there, until Alexander gains control of another
Treasure City.

• Raise ASP (automatic Treasury Reduction )
• Raise/Refit a Fleet, or add NSP to an existing Fleet (automatic
Treasury Reduction)
• Giving an Army extra Movement Points (possible Treasury
Reduction). An Army may move up to three (3) MPs (4 MPs
if led by Alexander) without needing a Treasury. An Army
which starts the Action Round with a LOC to a Depleted or
Full (not Empty) Treasury may move up to 6 MP. After finishing movement, the player rolls the die, adding to that die roll
the number of MPs (not Spaces) used by the Army, above the
basic movement allowance of 3 MPs. If the adjusted die roll
is 6 or more, the Treasury used for the extra MPs is Reduced.
An Army must be able to trace a LOC to a Treasury in order to
engage in Land battle at full strength, whether attacking or defending.. However, a Treasury never incurs Reduction when used
in this way.
EXAMPLE: Persian Army # 2 is in Sippara (Babylonia), with a
LOC to the Full Babylon Treasury. The Army moves using 5
MP. The Persian Player rolls the die, getting a 3. Even after
adding 2 (for the 2 extra MP), the total is less than 6, so the
Babylon treasury remains Full.
When Reduced, Treasuries go from Full to Depleted, or from
Depleted to Empty. The Royal Treasury goes from Full to Empty.
Multiple uses, e.g., raising ASPs for Armies in different spaces,
bring about multiple reductions.
Replenishing Treasuries
Players Replenish their Treasuries in Administrative Phases. To
replenish an individual Treasury, the player rolls one die, and
may add the following modifiers to that die roll:
+1 for the province the Treasure city is in
+1 for each province adjacent to the Treasure city’s province.

A player who gains control of an opponent’s Treasure City may
use that city as a treasury.

Each province used towards modifying the die roll must be controlled by the player seeking Replenishment, and may not be a
Frontier Province, Devastated, In Revolt, or suffering a Drought.
(Examples: Damascus, in Abarnahara, has 4 adjacent provinces.
Parthia cannot be used to replenish Ecbatana, even though it is
adjacent.)

7.2 Using and Replenishing Treasuries

A Treasure City may be replenished one level per Admin Phase.

The Persian Player starts with 7 Treasure Cities: Sardes, Damascus, Memphis, Babylon, Susa, Ecbatana, and Persepolis.

Treasuries enable players to undertake a variety of actions. In
many cases, using a treasury reduces that treasury’s ability to
enable further actions. Treasuries are always at one of three levels: Full, Depleted, or Empty. The last two levels are indicated
by Treasury Level markers.
The Memphis Treasury can never be Reduced; it is always Full.
The Royal Treasury marker has only two levels: Full and Empty.
To use a Treasury, units must be able to trace a Line of Communications to it. An Empty Treasury may not be used for any purpose other than removing ‘Useless’ status.
Treasuries are Reduced when used for one of the following purposes:

A province can only be used for one Replenishment die roll. A
province used to Replenish the Royal Treasury may not be used
as a replenishment die roll modifier in the same phase.
PLAY NOTE: The last item becomes important when the Persian player seeks to replenish his 4 eastern Treasure Cities.
If the adjusted die roll is ‘7’ or higher, increase the level of that
Treasury by one (i.e. from Empty to Depleted, from Depleted to
Full). If the adjusted die roll is lower than ‘7’, the Treasury level
remains unchanged. (Fire your tax collector ... he drew a blank.)
PLAY NOTE: The Persian Royal Treasury replenishes in a different manner (see 7.4).

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great
In an Administrative Phase, the Macedonian Player may use one
of his Treasuries to replenish another to which it can trace a
LOC (thereby reducing the Treasury which provided the Replenishment), without a die roll.
EXAMPLE: The Macedonians control both Ecbatana and Babylon. The Babylon Treasury is Full, while the Ecbatana Treasury
is Empty. In an Admin Phase, Alexander may reduce the Babylon Treasury to Depleted in order to raise the Ecbatana Treasury to Depleted.

7.3 Lines of Communication
In order for a Player to use or Replenish his Treasuries (or Raise
ASPs), he must have a Line of Communication to one of his
non-Empty Treasuries.
A Line of Communication (LOC) is traced in Movement Points
(not Spaces) from the relevant units to the Treasury. The Movement Points may be either naval or land, or a combination of
both; see the Movement Rules for Movement Point costs. A LOC
may not be traced through an enemy-controlled Space. It may
be traced through an uncontrolled or friendly Space, even if that
Space is in a province that is uncontrolled, Devastated, or suffering a Drought.
Land LOC:
• A Macedonian Land LOC may not be longer than ten (10)
MPs.
• A Persian Land LOC may not be longer than eight (8) MPs.
Naval LOC:
Both sides may
• trace a Naval LOC no longer than eight (8) MPs back to a
Treasure City, or
• trace a Naval LOC no longer than two (2) MPs back to any
friendly occupied Port (that is not under Siege).
PLAY NOTE: For the Naval LOC, you may trace either one or
the other; the two may not be combined.
Desert LOC Costs. Although it costs only 1 MP to use a Desert
Path for movement, it costs 2 MP when computing LOC.
A LOC being traced by sea may be broken by a player declaring
an Interception in the Sea Space through which the LOC is being traced. If LOC interruption is successful, move the Intercepting fleet to the Sea Space where the Interception took place.
No combat is undertaken.
A LOC being traced across a Strait may be broken using the
above method. However, it may not be intercepted if the player
tracing the LOC has a Fleet in a Port hex that is part of that
Strait.
EXAMPLE OF A LOC: A Macedonian army is in Aradus, with
a Persian army just north of it, in Myriandrus. The only Asian
Treasure City controlled by the Macedonians is Sardes, and the
Persians in Myriandrus block LOC by land. The Macedonian
can trace one Naval MP to Salamis (which is not occupied by
anyone) and then a second Naval MP to a likewise unoccupied

9

Aspendus. From Aspendus, it is only 4 Land MPs to Sardes,
and a LOC is established.

7.4 The Royal Treasury
Darius may travel with his own ‘treasury’. His is the
only Persian Army that may do so. The Macedonian
player may use the Royal Treasury if he captures it, as
explained below. The Royal Treasury is treated and used like a
Treasure City, except that it is mobile, local, and easily reduced.
The Royal Treasury may be used only by units in the same Space.
The Royal Treasury may only move with an Army-it may never
move with a Fleet.
A player may replenish his Royal Treasury in an Admin Phase if
the Royal Treasury is in the same space as a Treasure City. Replenishment is automatic (no die roll is necessary). However,
remember that a province used to Replenish the Royal Treasury
may not be used as a replenishment die roll modifier in the same
phase.
If stacked with a defeated Army, the Royal Treasury will retreat
with that Army [Exception: if the entire Army is eliminated, the
victor captures the Royal Treasury]. In addition, if Darius ‘Flees’
at the end of any Land Battle, the Macedonian Player captures
the Royal Treasury and may use it himself.

8.0 MANPOWER
8.1 Armies
Each Player may have a maximum of three Armies in play on
the board at any one time. Each Army is represented on the board
by its Army counter. An Army’s ASP strength is indicated by the
ASP counter(s) corresponding to the numerical strength of that
army that are in that Army’s Box (or under the Army counter, if
you like stacks). To that end, ASPs are used like change. Any
denomination of ASP counter can be used, as long as the counters’
ASP total is the same as the total number of ASPs actually in
that Army at any given time.
EXAMPLE: At the start of the game, Antipater’s Army has 15
ASPs. Place ASP markers totaling 15 in the Macedonian Army
#2 Box.
DESIGN NOTE: Yes, this is very generic. However, the tactical
‘expertise’ of the armies and breadth of their weapons systems
is indicated by their Elite Level (below) and the capabilities of
their Leaders. The game is far too strategic in nature to differentiate between infantry and cavalry.
ASPs may be placed in a Space without an Army, but ASPs that
are not part of an Army may not move, attack, or avoid battle.
They may Retreat; see 11.3/E. They become de facto garrisons,
although they may be added to an Army as part of a Reorganization action.
If two Armies are in the same Space at the start of an Action
Round, the player may, as his action for that round (Reorganization), change and reassign the ASPs and Leaders in each army.
Players may also use Reorganization to take ASPs that are on

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

10

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

the map but not part of an Army, and incorporate them in any
Army that is in the same Space as the ASPs.
PLAY NOTE: Moving armies may not pick up additional ASP
during Movement. That can only be done by Reorganization,
which is an action that precludes Movement.
If any Battle Fatigued or Useless ASP is combined with other
ASPs, all ASPs in the combined ASPs or Army also become
Battle Fatigued or Useless. (Useless takes precedence over Battle
Fatigued, if units of each status are combined.) If the Elite Levels of the ASPs to be combined is different, the combined ASPs
or Army take the Elite Level of the largest group of ASPs, minus
one Level (to a minimum Elite Level of zero). If the ASP groups
or Armies to be combined are of the same size, the Elite Level is
the highest Elite Level minus one.

8.2 Elite Levels
Each Army has an Elite Level; use a number marker to indicate
this in the Army’s Elite Level box . The Elite Level may go up or
down, depending on battle results. New Armies and non-Army
ASPs have an Elite level of ‘0’.
Elite Levels go up by one each time an Army
• wins a battle against an enemy (whose force is more than half
the Army’s ASPs) with at least twice as big a Battle Score as
the Loser
• takes a Major City by Siege Assault
• plays an ‘Increase in Training and Tactics’ Z Card on any Army
at Elite Level 3 or lower.
Elite Levels go down by one each time an Army Loses a Battle,
regardless of both the Battle Score differential, and whether the
opposing force consists of ASPs or GSPs.
The maximum Macedonian Elite Level is ‘5’. The maximum
Persian Elite level is ‘3’. The minimum is ‘0’.
DESIGN NOTE: The differences between the Macedonian and
Persian Elite maximums is indicative of their respective weapons systems.

8.3 Raising Armies
The number of ASPs that may be raised during the course of the
game is limited, as detailed below. Players must keep track of
the number of ASPs raised so that they do not exceed this level,
using the individual ASP tracks for this purpose.
• Maximum Macedonian ASP Available to be raised: 75
• Maximum Persian ASP Available to be raised: 175
To raise ASPs, the player must have a Line of Communications
(7.3); he then rolls three dice (3d6), adding them. That is the
number of ASPs he has raised. The Treasury that is used to raise
these new ASPs is reduced one level. The ASP Available Track
is reduced by the number of ASPs raised.
PLAY NOTE: The ASP maximums do not include the ASPs with
which the players start the game.
Raised Macedonian ASPs are placed with:

• any Army presently on the map, as long as
1. that Army can trace a LOC of any length to Pella
2. Pella’s Treasury is not Empty
• any new Army, which may be placed in any friendly Space in
any Macedonian-controlled province within the standard LOC
of a Full or Depleted Macedonian Treasury. To do this, the
Macedonian Player must have a Leader in that province, or
have one in his hand available for immediate placement with
the newly raised ASP.
Raised Persian ASPs must be placed in any of the following
Persian-held Treasure Cities: Ecbatana, Babylon, Susa, or
Persepolis. They may be divided among these cities, but they
may not be placed elsewhere. If the Persian Player does not control any of these Treasure Cities, he may not Raise any ASPs,
regardless of how many provinces he controls.
PLAY NOTE: He does not have to use the treasury from that
city to raise ASP; the restriction is on the location of the actual
ASP.
Eliminated ASPs are not re-usable in terms of the ASP track; the
ASP markers themselves are always available for use as needed.
Eliminated ASPs may not be added back to the ASP Available
Track. The ASP Available Track can only decline during a game;
it never increases.

8.4 Fleets
Fleets are composed of squadrons of War Galleys, represented
by Naval Strength Points (NSPs). The Fleets available in the
game are named according to place of Origin, and are limited to
the Fleet markers in the countermix. Use the Fleet counters and
the NSP markers in the same fashion as for Armies. The maximum NSP strength for each Fleet is printed on that Fleet marker.
Fleets have Home Ports, which are listed on the back of their
counters. This is where they may be brought back into the game
if eliminated (as long as the province for that port is controlled
by that player).
EXAMPLE: the Ionic Fleet of the Persian Navy may be raised
anew in Lesbos, Miletus, Chios or Halicarnassus.

8.5 Raising Fleets and NSP
Some Fleets do not start the game deployed. The following Fleets
do not Deploy, but are available, as below:
• Greek (will start in Athens; available only through card play)
• Cypriot (will start in Salamis)
• Phoenician (will start in Aradus, Byblos or Sidon).
The number on the counter is the NSPs that Fleet starts with
when it enters the game. That level can be reduced by combat,
and it may be restored by building new NSPs. It may never go
above that level.
Fleets belong to whoever controls the Home Port(s) for that Fleet,
listed on the back of the counter. Whoever controls all the Fleet’s
Home Port(s) may also raise that Fleet, either for the first time
in the game or after it is eliminated. If the Fleet is not on the

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great
map, the player must be able to trace a LOC from a Treasury to
the port in which it is raising this new Fleet, and then reduce that
Treasury. That Treasury may be used to raise more than one Fleet
(and/or replace NSPs in an on-map Fleet), but it still suffers only
one level of reduction.
Control of the Greek Fleet is determined by instructions on the
‘Greek Fleet’ Z Card, if played.
If a player gains control of a Fleet that had been controlled by
his opponent, and that Fleet is stacked in the same Space as other
Fleets controlled by his opponent, the Fleet’s new controller may
move his new Fleet up to 4 MPs. This is not a separate action by
the moving player; it is considered part of gaining control. Interception is not allowed by the Fleets in the Space from which it is
moved, but Interception is allowed from other spaces.
EXAMPLE: The Persians have the Tyre, Egypt and Ionic Fleets
in Tyre. Alexander, as part of a move, takes and controls the
ports of Lesbos, Mytilene, Miletus and Halicarnassus. The instant he does that, he gains control of the Ionic Fleet and may
move it 4 MPs away from Tyre. The Persian Tyre and Egypt
fleets may not intercept it as it moves away.
PLAY NOTE: Using the same treasury to both raise ASPs and
build NSPs will reduce that Treasury twice. As a result, only a
Full Treasury can do this, after which it will be Empty.
Refit: Destroyed Fleets may always Refit (be raised anew) in
their Home Port, as above. Fleets with reduced NSPs can be
brought up to strength in the same manner; they, too, must be in
their Home Port to do so.
PLAY NOTE: For example, you can’t add NSPs to the Egyptian
Fleet in Tyre, even if you control both Tyre and Pelusium.

8.6 Garrisons
Garrisons—small forces left behind to control cities, towns, and provinces—are represented by Garrison Strength Points (GSPs). Garrisons are raised
and placed as part of a Movement Action. No LOC
is needed. They may be removed freely as part of an Admin
Phase.
A player who gains control of a Space, or who moves into or
through an uncontrolled Space, may place a garrison therein.
There is no Movement cost to do so, but he must have GSPs
available. The moving Army is not affected by the placement of
the Garrison.
Each garrison counter is worth one GSP. The number of GSPs
that a Player may have on the map at any one time is limited by
the number of GSP counters available: Macedonian [20], Persian [30].
• A Major City may hold up to 10 GSPs (and any number of
ASPs) Inside the City. GSPs may never be placed outside a
city.

11

GSPs are similar to ASPs. However, GSPs may not move, retreat or Intercept. They cannot attack; they will defend if attacked.
When taking losses, a player may not take more losses in GSPs
than ASPs, unless all ASPs are eliminated. If the ASPs have to
retreat, any remaining GSPs (after losses are taken) are eliminated.
EXAMPLE: A Persian Army of 27 ASPs in Issus, which also
has 3 Persian GSPs, is defeated by the Macedonians and must
lose 4 ASPs/GSPs. The Persian eliminates 2 GSPs and 2 ASPs,
retreats his Army of ASP, and then also removes the 1 GSP left
as the Macedonian Army takes over the Space.
Eliminated GSP markers are available for use in any Round after the one in which they were removed.

8.7 Tribes
Some Spaces start the game occupied by
Tribes (e.g., The Uxii in Susiana). Tribes
are ‘independent’; no-one controls or
moves them. They are treated like GSPs,
except that once eliminated, they may not return to play. Tribes
have no effect on the control of a province. When attacked, the
attacker’s opponent rolls any necessary dice on the Tribes’ behalf.
Tribes do block LOC, as they are not friendly to either player.
Armies must stop when they enter a Space occupied by Tribes.

9.0 MACEDONIAN
WEARINESS
DESIGN NOTE: As Alexander’s campaign drew onwards, his
army, sated by loot and battle, and tired of risking death against
recalcitrant locals, longed to return home. First they balked
while on the Indian Frontier, upon which Alexander was forced
to re-organize his army. They eventually mutinied in Babylon
(323 B.C.), forcing Alexander to change some of his plans and
begin to head for home. However, Alexander died before he
could do this.
To simulate this, we have the Macedonian Weariness Track and
possible Check, conducted during every Administrative Phase
which is brought about by the draw of the Admin Phase APM.
The Weariness Level is adjusted as follows.
+1:

each Round in which a Macedonian Army uses more
than one Desert Path to move (not including Retreats,
Avoidance or Interceptions). Example: a Macedonian
Army moving from Jerusalem to ‘the Nabatanei’ would
earn a Weariness point.

+1

for each Land battle involving a Macedonian Army
outside Europe, against a Persian Army of 10 or more
ASPs/GSPs (more than half of the Persian strength
points must be ASPs).

+1

at the conclusion of any Siege, regardless of result, except for sieges concluded by Surrender.

• All other spaces may hold a maximum of 3 GSPs, in addition
to ASPs.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

12

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

+ or –1 for each specific Z Card played. EXAMPLES: ‘Mass
Marriage’, ‘Alexander Goes Native’.
–5

for each Mutiny.

In every APM-generated Admin Phase in which a die roll is
needed, the Macedonian Player rolls the die, adjusting it by the
Weariness Level. If the adjusted die roll is 20 or more, the army
with Alexander has mutinied. (Obviously, a die roll will not be
needed until later in the game.)
When Alexander’s Army Mutinies, the Macedonian Player rolls
the die; the result is the number of Macedonian Army ASP removed from play, as if they were eliminated.

Desert Paths: 1 MP to use when moving, but cost 2 MP when
tracing LOC
Deep Sea: 4 MP. Using Deep Sea paths may incur losses from
Storms. May not be used to trace a LOC. [These paths represent
the deep sea routes that cross the Eastern Med, north to south,
which were often hazardous for the ships of the time.]
Transit Points: These red dots represent areas that are not important for determining control or victory. They are treated as
normal Spaces for Land movement, except that no unit may end
its movement in a Transit Point. Therefore, no combat may take
place in a Transit Point.

Persian Victory through Macedonian Weariness: If Alexander’s
Army mutinies, roll one die again. If that die roll is lower than
the number of Treasure Cities still held by the Persians, the Persians win the game.

Movement costs may be increased by Bad Weather.

10.0 MOVEMENT

10.3 Stacking

When it is a Player’s Action Round he may move any one (1) of
his Armies or Fleets. Play of a Major Campaign Z Card allows
the player to move more than one Army and/or Fleet, as stated
on the card.

10.1 Land Movement
Armies have a movement capability of 3 MPs without a LOC (4
for Alexander’s army). This can be extended to up to 6 MPs
with a LOC, at the risk of possible Treasury Reduction.
Exception: If a Persian Army includes the Royal Treasury it
may move no more than 4 MPs per round. Alexander’s army’s
maximum MP allowance is reduced to 5MPs if it carries the
Royal Treasury. (The baggage train for Darius’ treasury was immense, and greatly restricted rapid movement.)
Movement from one space to another must be by a path (land or
sea). Units may not stop in a Transit Point.
A player must state how many MPs he is going to use before he
moves his Army. He may actually use less, but he may never use
more than he declares.
PLAY NOTE: It is the amount stated that determines possible
treasury reduction, not the amount of MPs actually used.
A Player moving an Army can always drop off ASPs (at no cost)
in any Space through which his army moves. However, an Army
must use Reorganization to add ASPs to its strength by picking
up ASPs which are already on the map.
ASPs may only move if they have been assigned to an Army.

10.2 Land Movement Costs
It costs 1 MP to use any Path, land or sea, with the following
exceptions:

Units entering and staying in an otherwise unoccupied Major
City Space must state whether they will be Inside or Outside
that city (using a marker to indicate their status). There is no MP
cost to do so.
There is no limit to how many ASPs may be in any one Space.
However, a player may have no more than 10 GSPs (and any
number of ASPs) Inside a Major City. A player may have no
more than 3 GSPs (and any number of ASPs) in a non-Major
City space. ASPs from opposing sides may not end any Action
in the same Space.
PLAY NOTE: A moving Army can end its movement in an enemy-occupied Space, but that will cause combat, at the end of
which one of the Armies will leave the Space.
A moving Army must stop when it enters an enemy- or tribaloccupied Space. However, if the stationary unit is Inside a Major City, the moving units may either continue to move (subject
to Interception), or stop and declare a Siege.
If the stationary units are Outside a Major City, or in a nonMajor City Space, they may
• be subject to Overrun
• attempt to Avoid Battle
• be reinforced, if subject to attack, by friendly Intercepting units.

10.4 Reorganization
A Player may Reorganize two or more Armies as his Action
Round, if both armies start the Action Round in the same Space.
He may combine or rearrange the strength of the armies in any
way he sees fit, as long as the Overall Commander ASP restrictions are followed. Such an undertaking is the only Action he
may perform.
A Player moving can always drop off ASPs at no cost in any
Space through which his army moves.
However, an army must use Reorganization to add ASP to its
strength by picking up ASP already on the map.

Mountains, Mountain Passes and Straits: 2 MP

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

10.5 Overrun
If a player moves an Army into a Space containing enemy ASPs
or GSPs that are not Inside a Major City, and the moving Army
has at least an 8-to-1 numerical superiority, the stationary units
are all eliminated, unless they can Avoid Battle. Overrunning a
smaller force in this way costs no Movement Points, and the
victorious Army may continue Movement. Overruns do not raise
Elite levels, nor do they cause any Battle Fatigue. If the conditions for Overrun are met, a Land Battle may not take place in
that Space instead.

10.6 Interception
A moving Army may be intercepted by an enemy Army if moving on land, or an enemy Fleet if moving by sea. A moving Fleet
may be intercepted by an enemy Fleet.
If an Army (or Leader moving alone) moves into a Space that is
connected directly by a single Land Path to a Space containing
an enemy Army, the enemy Army may attempt to intercept the
moving unit(s).
Units moving by Sea Lanes may be Intercepted by enemy Fleets
within two Naval MPs of the target Space.

Land Interception
To intercept on land, roll one die. Modify the die roll by adding
the Battle Rating of any friendly Leader who is with the intercepting Army. If the modified die roll is 6 or more, the Interception succeeds. Move the intercepting army into the target Space
and proceed to Land Battle (including Avoidance). The intercepting army is now the Attacker. If the modified die roll is less
than 6, the Interception does not take place, and the moving Army
may continue its movement.
There are restrictions to Land Interception.
• You may not Intercept using a Mountain Pass, Strait or Sea
path.
• An Interception using a Mountain path incurs a –1 DRM. [Note
that a Mountain path is not the same as a Mountain Pass path.]
• Armies may not intercept Fleets.
• Armies Inside Major Cities which are under Siege may not
Intercept.
• Armies which are targeted for Interception after moving into
a Major City Space may not move Inside the city to escape the
Interception.

13

• Lanes of Interception may not be traced through Enemy Fleets
(as opposed to into them).
• Fleets may not intercept Armies moving on Land.
Fleets may intercept Armies moving by Sea. [See the rules for
Naval Movement, and 11.5.]
EXAMPLE: An Army in Pella wants to move to Ephesus by sea.
It moves from Pella to the Transit Point in the Aegean Sea just
to the south of Macedonia, and then to Lemnos, intending to
proceed from there to Ephesus, via Mytilene and Chios. However, an enemy Fleet based in Ilium announces that it will attempt to Intercept the moving units as they pass through Lemnos,
2 Naval MPs away.

10.7 Naval Movement
The Fleets in the game represent war galleys used for combat
and other military objectives. Armies may move by sea (Transport) without any naval counters of any kind, although it helps
their survival rate if accompanied by a Fleet.
Armies move by sea using the Sea Paths as if they were Land
Paths, with appropriate costs. They are subject to Interception
(at sea) by enemy Fleets.
A Fleet controlled by one player may co-exist in a Port with an
Army belonging to his opponent. There cannot be any combat
between the two.
Units may use no more than 4 MPs for Naval Movement. Armies
may combine land and sea movement, but they may use each
type of movement only once during a single action (e.g. Land +
Sea, or Sea + Land is permitted, but not Land-Sea-Land or SeaLand-Sea). Any land movement is always considered as above
the MPs expended for Naval movement, and the Land Movement is subject to the standard LOC and potential Treasury expenditure rules.
EXAMPLE: An Army decides (see 10.1) to use 5 MP for its
Movement. It moves 1 MP to a Port and then moves 4 MP by
sea to another Port. It has used its allotted MP for that activation, but even if it has a remaining MP it could not have used it
for Land Movement (as it has already moved by Land) or Naval
Movement (because it has used its 4 Naval; MP maximum).
A moving Fleet or Transported Army may not pick up additional
Fleets along the way and continue movement. Only Fleets that
start in the same Space may move together.

A single Army may attempt to intercept a moving enemy force
in each eligible adjacent Space it enters during that movement,
if the intercepting player so desires. Moreover, more than one
Army may attempt to intercept a moving force.

Regardless of the number of accompanying Fleets, no more than
15 ASPs plus any number of Leaders may be Transported by sea
in a single Action.

Naval Interception

Fleets do not need a leader (Admiral) to move. It should go without saying that a Fleet may never move ‘inland’!

Units moving by Sea Lanes may be Intercepted by enemy Fleets
within two Naval MPs of the target Space. Naval Interception is
automatic, but there are restrictions.

Fleets need to trace a LOC to move. If they cannot trace a LOC,
they may not move.

• Deep Sea Lanes may not be used for Interception purposes.

Units moving along Deep Sea Lanes:
• may not combine such movement with Land movement, and

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

14

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

• are subject to the ‘Storms at Sea’ Z Card [Play note: the effect
of these storms can be quite brutal].

11.0 COMBAT

10.8 Leader Movement

A land battle is initiated when an Army moves into a Space containing an enemy Army or Garrison, and those units do not or
cannot Avoid Battle [Exception: if Overrun applies, no Land
Battle occurs. See 10.5]. A battle forces the moving Army to
stop moving. If victorious, the attacking Army may resume movement (if it has MP remaining). The moving Army is the attacker;
the stationary Army or Garrison is the defender.

Leaders usually move with their Armies or Fleets. However, a
player may move any number of Leaders, alone, as his Action
for that Round. Leaders do not pay any movement costs. They
may move anywhere (and thus have a rather extended range),
but they are subject to Interception. If Intercepted they are considered Captured, and are removed from the game.

10.9 Devastation
A Player may choose to Move and Devastate as the
action for his Round. Only Armies may Devastate a
province; Fleets, garrisons and Local Tribes may not.
Armies involved in a Devastation Action may not
engage in combat that Round, which means they may not enter
an enemy-occupied Space that Phase. An Army may Devastate
only if that entire province has no enemy presence. [Exception:
You may devastate a province that has an enemy Garrison (not
Army) Inside a Major City.]
Devastation is part of Movement, and uses MPs in addition to
those expended for movement itself. When attempting to Devastate a province, the player rolls one die. He modifies the die
roll by adding the number of MPs he wishes the Devastating
Army to expend, out of the total he has declared for that unit. If
the adjusted die roll is more than the number of Spaces in that
province (excluding Transit Points), the province is Devastated.
Otherwise, no Devastation takes place and the MPs are lost.
EXAMPLE: A Macedonian Army starts in Bynyan (Cappadocia). The Macedonian Player announces that the Army will use
up to 5 MPs during that action. It uses 1 MP to enter Malatya
(Commagene) and then announces a Devastation attempt with
the expenditure of its remaining 4 MPs. The Macedonian rolls
a ‘3’, to which he adds the 4 from his MP total. The result of 7
is more than the number of spaces in Commagene (4), so
Commagene is now devastated. Place a Devastated marker in
the province. The Macedonian Player must then check for Treasury Reduction because he used more than 4 MPs.
Only one attempt to Devastate may be made in any province per
Activity Segment.
Devastation has the following effects:
• Devastated provinces may not be used to Replenish treasuries
• The cost of tracing a LOC doubles for any land path in any
part of that province
• A Devastated province may not be used by the Macedonian
Player (Alexander) towards determining his victory.
All Devastated markers are automatically removed in an Administrative Phase, after Treasury Replenishment.

11.1 Land Battle

If the Defender is Inside a Major City he must be Besieged; he
cannot undergo Battle. However, defending units Outside a Major
City may be reinforced by friendly units from Inside the same
Major City (a ‘sortie’). Place the units that wish to sortie Outside the Major City. They may now join the defenders against
the attacking Army.

11.2 Land Combat Sequence
Land Combat is resolved in the following order:
1. Defender may attempt Avoidance
2. Determine Battle Strength
3. Resolve the Battle, adjusting Weariness and Elite Levels as
necessary
4. Determine Leader Casualties (if any)
5. Loser Retreats
6. Determine and apply Battle Losses
7. Assign Battle Fatigue and Useless status.

11.3 Land Battle Details
A. Avoidance
When a moving Army enters a Space occupied by an enemy
Army, the latter may attempt to Avoid Battle. An intercepted
Army may also attempt Avoidance. GSPs may not attempt to
Avoid Battle. To attempt Avoidance, the defending player rolls
one die, adding to that die roll the Battle Rating of any one
friendly Leader in that Space.
If the adjusted die roll is ‘6’ or higher, the target Army has successfully Avoided the battle, but must move into any adjacent
(directly connected) Space that is not occupied by enemy units
of any type. The moving Army may continue to move, even if
that means another possible battle (and more Avoidance ).
If the adjusted die roll is less than ‘6’, there is no Avoidance, and
battle is joined.
PLAY NOTE: If the Overall Commander is with the Army (e.g.,
Darius), you must use his Battle Rating.
B. Determining Battle Strength
Each side’s Battle Strength is the total number of ASPs and GSPs
he has in the battle.
C. Resolving Battle
Each player rolls two dice, adding them and adjusting that dice
roll by any of the modifiers listed below. He cross-references
that adjusted total with his Battle Strength to give his Battle Score.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great
The player with the higher Battle Score wins. If the Battle Scores
are even, the battle is a draw; see below. If necessary, increase
the Macedonian Weariness level, and adjust the Elite Levels of
the Armies involved.
D. Battle Dice Roll Modifiers (DRMs)
The following DRMs may apply to the Battle dice roll. All Battle
DRMs are cumulative.
Leader Military Capability. Add the Battle Ratings of any two
Leaders present; if the OC is present, he must be one of those
Leaders.
LOC. If an Army had no LOC when it started the Player Phase,
subtract one (–1) from its die roll.

15

but they do not get the benefit of subtracting the Leader’s Rating from that die roll.
A player may cease retreating short of its Mandated number of
Retreat Spaces, if the defeated force retreats Inside a Major City
or Stronghold.
The Retreating Player adds one to his Battle Loss die roll for
each Movement Point after the first that would have to be spent
to cover the Retreat route if it were normal movement.
[EXAMPLE: If a defeated force must retreat along a Mountain
Path, the controlling player adds one to the Battle Loss die roll;
that Path would require 2 MPs to traverse, and the first MP of
the Retreat is ignored.]

Elite. A player gains a +1 DRM for each level of Elite Level
superiority his Army has, compared to his opponent’s Army.
EXAMPLE: A Macedonian Army, Elite Level ‘3’, faces a Persian Army, Elite Level ‘1’. Macedonian gets a +2 DRM for Battle.

Retreating Inside a Major City, or into a Stronghold Space, does
not cost any further MPs/Attrition Points.

Battle Fatigue/Useless. A defending Army with Battle Fatigue
subtracts two (–2) from its Battle dice roll. An Army with Fatigue may not attack. Note that an Army marked Useless is considered to have Battle Fatigue (11.3.H).

DESIGN NOTE: Most losses from a battle in ancient times occurred during Retreats, and this mechanic for attrition reflects
that to some extent.

Surprise. If a player has played a ‘Surprise’ Card, that player
has achieved surprise, and may add two (+2) to his dice roll. If
both Players gain Surprise, the +2 DRMs cancel each other out
and have no effect.
Mountain Passes and Straits. If the attacker used a Mountain
Pass or Strait to enter the Space where the Battle is taking place,
he subtracts two (–2) from his dice roll.
Strongholds. If the defender is in a Stronghold, the Attacker
subtracts two (–2) from his Battle dice roll.
PLAY AND DESIGN NOTE: The military differences between
the two sides in the game are the remarkable advantage the
Macedonians have in Leadership and Weapons Systems (represented by the Elite ratings): the two overwhelmingly important
aspects of battle in this era. The chances of the Persian Army
actually beating an Alexander-led Army in a major battle are
slim, but not non-existent. We did have such Persian victories
in playtesting, mostly of the Pyrrhic variety. The Persian’s challenge is to accept that and devise a strategy that circumvents
the Macedonian’s military superiority. It can be done.
E. Retreat
The losing force must Retreat (move) a number of Spaces equal
to a die roll. This die roll is modified by subtracting the printed
Battle Rating of the OC, if present; if the OC is not present, use
the lowest-rated leader present. The minimum Retreat is one
Space; an Army may always retreat more Spaces than required.
The path of retreat must never enter the same Space twice, and
must always take the losing force further away from the Battle
Space (it may not move into a Space closer to the victorious
Army than the one it is presently in).

A Retreating Army must stay together; it may not drop off ASPs
as it retreats.

PLAY NOTE: There is no limit as to how far a unit may go
when retreating, other than the player’s willingness to risk incurring massive attrition. However, it may sometimes be smart
to take an extended Retreat, and the concurrent Attrition, to
keep that Army away from another battle.
If the battle was a Draw, both players roll as if they were Victors. However, regardless of the loss results, the Attacking Army
must return to the Space from which it moved to enter the Battle
Space. This ‘retreat’ is not considered when determining Battle
Losses.
F. Battle Losses
To determine how many ASPs are lost, each player rolls one die
and consults the Battle Loss and Attrition Table.
• The Victor subtracts one (–1) from his die roll. If his Battle
Score was at least twice as high as that of the loser, he subtracts two (–2).
• An Army with no LOC (7.3) for the battle adds two (+2) to its
Battle Loss die roll.
• An Army with Battle Fatigue adds two (+2) to its Battle Loss
die roll
• An Army with at least three times (3x) the Strength of its opponent subtracts two (–2) from its Battle Loss die roll.
• Either player may play a Determined Troops card to have his
opponent add one (+1) to his Loss die roll.
• The Retreating Player adds one (+1) to his Battle Loss die roll
for each Movement Point after the first that would have to be
spent to cover the Retreat route if it were normal movement.
The cross-referenced result is the number of ASPs that player’s
Army has lost. This number of ASPs is immediately removed.

PLAY NOTE: Remember, ASP without an Army may Retreat,
© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

16

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great
G. Battle Fatigue
The Losing Army of a Battle is automatically ‘Fatigued’. Place a ‘Battle Fatigue’ marker on that Army
to indicate this status. There is no additional penalty
if a Fatigued Army suffers Fatigue again.
The Victor is Fatigued only if his Loss die roll result has an ‘F’
next to it.
Armies with Battle Fatigue:
• may not Attack or even enter an enemy-occupied Space
• subtract two (–2) from any Battle Result dice roll
• add two (+2) to any Battle loss die roll.
All Battle Fatigue markers are removed in an Admin Phase.
H. Useless
A Losing Army is rendered ‘Useless’ if it suffers more
than twice as many Battle Losses in Strength Points
as the Victor. ‘Useless’ status is determined after all
initial retreats have taken place (but see below). Place a ‘Useless’ marker on that Army to indicate this status.

Example of a Land Battle
The game starts with Alexander (with Army #1) crossing the
Hellespont at Chersonese and moving to Cyzicus, occupied by
Memnon and Persian Army #2. Memnon attempts to Avoid, but
rolls a ‘2’, which, even with Memnon’s Battle Rating of 2, is not
enough to escape. Both armies have a LOC.
Alexander’s Army has 33 ASP. It also contains Alexander (Battle
Rating 4). Its Elite rating of ‘4’ is 3 higher than the ‘1’ of
Memnon’s Army. No cards are played, so Alexander’s DRM for
the 28-35 column on the Battle table is +7. He rolls a ‘10’,
adjusted to a 16+, giving him a battle score of ‘16’.
The Persian player gets a +2 DRM for Memnon’s Battle Rating
and rolls a ‘5’, adjusted to ‘7’, under the 36-44 column, giving
him a battle Score of ‘7’.
Alexander is the victor, and, as his Battle Score is at least double
that of Memnon, his #1 Army increases its Elite Level to ‘5’.
Memnon’s Army’s Elite Level drops to ‘0’ after the loss, For
retreat, he rolls a ‘1’, but chooses to retreat 3 Spaces into the
Treasure City of Sardes.
Alexander checks his losses on the Attrition and Battle Loss
Table, rolling a ‘3’, from which he subtracts two, as his battle
Score was at least twice that of Memnon’s. He loses 1 ASP but
does not suffer Battle Fatigue.
Memnon checks for losses, and rolls a ‘3’, too. But he adds ‘2’
to that for the extra MP he retreated. He loses 7 ASP and his
Army is rendered Useless (and Battle Fatigued). He doesn’t have
to choose Flight as his army is in a Treasure City (and will
hopefully be able to refit there).
There are no Leader casualties, as no one rolled an adjusted ‘9’
or ‘13’.
Alexander, who has used only 4 MP to close to battle with
Memnon, may continue to move, if he announced he would be
using more than 4 MP, and checks for possible Treasury Reduction (Pella) required to move more than 4 MP.

A Useless Army:
• is also Battle Fatigued, regardless of the die roll that produced
its losses
• may never move more than 3 Spaces as normal Movement
• is totally destroyed, and all of its ASPs and Leaders removed,
if it loses any battle while Useless.
An army rendered Useless may take Flight: in effect, a second
Retreat. That Army may move as many Spaces in retreat as it
wishes, but must roll again on the Battle Loss table, according
to the standard retreat rules.
An Army may end its Useless status and remove the Useless
marker during any Admin Phase that the Army spends in a Treasure City, regardless of the status of the treasury.
PLAY AND BALANCE NOTE: While this mechanic reflects some
of the realities of ancient warfare, it does help Alexander, something he doesn’t really need. Those of you looking for a balanced game should consider not using the ‘Useless’ rule, 11.3H.
I. Leader Casualties
If a Persian Player’s adjusted Battle dice roll was a ‘9’, or the
Macedonian’s adjusted Battle dice roll was a ‘13’, there is a possibility that one or more of that player’s Leaders was killed. Leaders can only be affected if their Battle Ratings were used in the
battle.
This mechanic does not apply to either Alexander or Darius; see
below.
If the player rolls the casualty number (i.e. 9 for the Persian, 13
for the Macedonian), the player rolls one die for each Leader
used in that Battle. If he rolls a ‘5’ or ‘6’, that Leader is Dead. A
1-4 has No Effect.

The Macedonian Weariness level is increased by 1.

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great
Darius. The Persian Player never rolls for Darius. Instead, if the
Macedonian’s Battle Score was at least twice that of the Persians (with Darius present, even if his Battle Rating is not used),
Darius Flees (after his Army conducts any mandated retreats).
When this happens, roll two dice for Darius and apply the results below:
• 2-7: place Darius in any Persian-controlled Treasury City. If
there is none to which Darius could trace a LOC, treat as an
11+ dice roll.
• 8-10: the Persian places Darius in any province that is exactly
4 MPs away. If there is none to which Darius could trace a
LOC, treat as an 11+ dice roll.
• 11+: Darius is caught and killed. (By whom is not important.)
If any Macedonian combat unit enters a hex occupied by Darius
but no Persian combat units, the Persian rolls again, adding 3 to
the dice roll. (The Royal Treasury and Family have no effect on
this procedure, but may be captured if they are in the same Space
as Darius when he is killed. See 7.4, 14.0.)
Alexander. Alexander may incur Injury Points (IPs) after every
battle in which he uses his Battle Rating, regardless of the result
of that battle. The Macedonian Player keeps track of Alexander’s
IPs on the Alexander Injury Level Track. After a battle in which
Alexander uses his Battle Rating, the Macedonian player rolls
two dice, and applies the results below:
•
•
•
•

2-5: Alexander incurs 0 IP
6-9: Alexander incurs 1 IP
10-11: Alexander incurs 2 IPs
12: Alex may have been Killed. Roll one die again: if the die
roll is a 1-5, he earns 2 IPs; if it is a ‘6’ he has been Killed in
battle... unless the Macedonian Player can play the ‘Black
Cleitus’ card. (See the Z Cards.)

When the Alexander Injury Level Track reaches ‘20’, the Macedonian player rolls one die in each succeeding Administrative
Phase:
• Even number: Alexander survives
• Odd number: Alexander dies of his wounds. Alexander may
not be saved by Cleitus in this case. If Alexander dies, the
game ends immediately in a Persian victory.
HISTORICAL NOTE: Alexander was a very ‘up front’ commander and, in doing so, suffered a remarkable number of minor and major wounds and injuries, the last of which-an arrow
in his chest-almost killed him, and was a leading cause in his
ultimate death. At Granicus he was saved from almost certain
death by the actions of Cleitus.

11.4 Sieges
Sieges occur when a Defender (which might be just a garrison
of GSPs or non-Army ASPs), is attacked while Inside a Major
City. In order to declare a Siege, the Attacker must move an
Army of at least 10 ASPs into the Major City Space and declares
a Siege. The Attacker’s Army remains Outside the Major City.
Place an ‘Under Siege’ marker on the city. The units Inside the

17

city may not move out as long as the Siege is maintained (see
below). The Siege lasts until resolved, or the Attacker (besieger)
decides to abandon the siege by not maintaining it.
To Maintain a Siege, the besieger must have an LOC for that
Player Phase, even if he is not going to conduct any Siege activities that Round. If he does lose his LOC, remove the ‘Under
Siege’ marker; the defenders of the city are free to move out
when it is their Round. The besieger must always have at least
10 ASPs present; if not, the Siege is over, and the defending
force may once again move out, as above.
The Attacker may resolve the Siege in one of two ways:
1. Surrender. A Major City may Surrender simply because of
the presence of an enemy Army in that Space, if that Army fulfills the conditions stated above (minimum 10 ASPs, and a LOC).
This occurs as part of movement. No Siege need be declared,
but it costs 1 MP to Demand Surrender. To determine Surrender,
the moving player rolls one die and modifies the result as follows:
• +?: the Battle Rating of any one Leader in his Army
• +1: Attacker has more than twice as many ASPs as the Defender has ASPs/GSPs combined
• –?: Fortification Rating of the city in question.
• +3: if Attacker plays a Treachery card and, in doing so, reduces the Treasury he is using to provide a LOC (see the Z
cards).
• –1 for each ASP inside the City (GSPs have no effect on this
DRM).
If the Attacker’s adjusted die roll is 6 or more, the city Surrenders immediately. No Siege Assault is needed. If the modified
die roll is less than 6, the Major City must be Assaulted to be
taken.
An Army may make only one Demand for Surrender, per game,
for each Major City.
2. Assault. The player may make only one Assault per Action
Round, regardless of how many Sieges he has under way on the
map.
To resolve a Siege Assault, the Attacking Player rolls one die
and consults the Siege Assault Table, modifying the die roll as
follows:
–? the City’s Defense rating (printed next to the city Space)
+1 Attacker has more than twice as many ASPs as the Defender has ASPs/GSPs combined
–1 if the defender has a Fleet in that Major port
+1 if the Attacker has a Fleet in that Major port
+1 if the Macedonian player is using Diades of Thessaly in
the Assault (see the Z Cards).
The Siege Assault Table states the results as follows:

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

18

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

• the number to the left of the slash (/) is the number of Siege
Points the city has incurred. Indicate this by placing a Siege
Point marker on the city.
• the number to the right of the slash (/) is the number of ASPs
lost by the Attacker, if any.
A Major City falls when it has incurred 3 Siege Points. All defending ASPs, GSPs and Leaders inside are eliminated. Defending Fleets must Retreat to the nearest friendly Port, regardless of
distance. The Victor may now move up to 10 of his ASPs Inside
the Major City.
The Defender may resolve the Siege in one of three ways:
Negotiated Capitulation. The defender may always Surrender
a city under Siege on whatever terms both players agree upon.
Terms may include how many ASPs/GSPs are to be eliminated
(if any), and movement to adjacent provinces (but no further).
Payment is also allowed, in that one player may, by reducing a
Treasury of his own, replenish one of his opponent’s Treasuries
(if there is a LOC).
Counter-Attack. The Defender may attack the besieger, using
normal Battle rules. If he wins, the Siege is broken and the ‘Under Siege’ marker removed. If he wishes, the Defender may then
immediately move his Army Outside the city, to any adjacent
province, or stay Inside the city. If he loses or draws, the Siege is
still in effect and the defending force must stay inside the City.
Escape by Sea. ASPs besieged inside a Major City may use
Naval Movement to ‘escape’, but only if they have a Fleet present
in that Port. Such escape movement is subject to Interception, as
normal.

11.5 Fleets and Naval Combat
Fleets do not ‘carry’ land ASPs; they help protect such movement, and hinder that the naval transport of your opponent’s
ASPs. They do not need a LOC to engage in combat.
Naval Combat occurs when:
• the active, moving player moves his Fleet(s) into a Space occupied by an enemy Fleet
• the non-active player Intercepts enemy Naval Movement, even
if no Fleet is accompanying the moving force.

If the modified result is 6 or more, he avoids combat. However,
if the Attacker has played a Surprise Card for Avoidance (even if
Defender does as well), he may use it to negate Defender Avoidance (i.e., the Intercepted player may not attempt to Avoid). If
the Attacker uses a Surprise card to negate Avoidance, the same
card may not be used to influence the combat as well.
If Naval Combat has been avoided, the moving units return to
the Port from which they started their movement. Otherwise,
Naval Combat occurs.

Resolving Naval Combat
Naval Combat is resolved by each Player rolling as many dice
as he has NSPs. Thus, a player with a Fleet comprising 3 NSPs
rolls three dice.
A Player with an Admiral may roll additional dice equal to that
Admiral’s Naval Rating.
Each die roll of ‘6’ destroys one enemy NSP of the rolling player’s
choice. Dice rolling is simultaneous, and results are applied simultaneously. Exception: a player who plays a Surprise Card
for Naval Combat may roll and apply all losses on his opponent
first, before his opponent rolls. After both players have rolled
once, combat is finished.
If the moving player has no Fleets, just transported ASPs, he
does not get to roll. His opponent destroys all the transported
ASPs if he rolls at least one ‘6’.
The player who suffered the fewer losses (in NSPs) is the Victor. The player who suffers more NSP losses is the Loser. If NSP
losses are equal it is a ‘draw’, and the moving units are treated
as Losers. If only one player has NSPs, he is the Victor if he
succeeds in destroying his opponent’s transported ASPs (by rolling at least one ‘6’, as above); his opponent is the Loser. If the
only player with NSPs does not destroy his opponent’s transported ASPs, the Naval Combat is treated as a draw.
The Loser must return to the Port from which he started. If that
Fleet started in the Port in which battle took place, it must retreat to the nearest Port unoccupied by an enemy Fleet.
The Victor either stays in the Space in which the battle took
place, or, if it was the moving force, continues movement if possible.

Naval Interception is automatic, has a Range of 2 Naval MPs,
and may occur only in Spaces, not Transit Points. Deep Sea Lanes
may not be used for Interception.

12.0 RHODES

EXAMPLE: A force moving by sea from Athens to Cnossus could
be intercepted by an enemy Fleet sitting in Halicarnassus. However, it could not be intercepted in Cnossus by a fleet in Cyrene,
because they are only linked by a Deep Sea connection.

Rhodes is starting her career as toll-taker and ‘traffic cop’ for
the Eastern Med. She is an independent province and starts the
game controlled by neither player, but with her own 2 GSP garrison and a 4 NSP Rhodes Fleet (the front side).

Avoidance

A player may gain use of that Fleet in one of two ways:

The Intercepted Player may attempt to Avoid Naval Combat. To
do so, he rolls one die and modifies the result as follows:
+? the Naval Rating of his Admiral, if any is present
+2 if he plays a Surprise Card for Avoidance purposes.

1)by playing the Rhodes Card when no one controls Rhodes; see the card. In this instance, the
player gets to use the Rhodes 1 NSP Fleet, with

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

19

the 4 NSP Rhodes Fleet remaining in Rhodes and reduced to 3
NSPs.

victory conditions), in any Macedonian Action Round after the
one in which the Macedonian player captures the Royal Family.

2)by capturing Rhodes (by Siege). In this case, the Rhodes 2
GSP garrison is eliminated and the victorious player gets what’s
left of the Rhodes Fleet.

HISTORICAL NOTE: After the battle of Issus (Cilicia), where
the Royal Family was captured, Darius offered the hand of his
daughter, Stateira, as part of a deal. Alexander politely refused
(although he did marry her later, in the somewhat strange Mass
Marriage ceremony). Alexander treated Darius’ family with the
utmost respect, mostly because it helped establish his position
in Persia as Great King.

While Rhodes remains independent, none of her units may be
moved. However, all Naval Movement going through Rhodes
must end its movement in Rhodes; it may continue moving in a
subsequent action. There is no combat unless an attack is declared. LOC are not affected. One player’s fleets may be attacked
in Rhodes by his opponent, using normal combat rules. An independent Rhodes will not interfere or take part in such activities.

13.0 ALEXANDRIA
There are four ‘Alexandria’ counters, representing cities built
by Alexander, superficially in honor of himself. However, the
cities served a double purpose-they were de facto garrison posts,
and they spread Greek ideas and culture.
Alexander may build an Alexandria in the Alexandria ‘space’ in Egypt (provided he controls Egypt),
and in any Frontier Province or Persian Province that
he controls. An Alexandria is treated as a Minor City,
and may be built on any existing Minor City or Transit Point.
Alexandrias may not be built on a Stronghold or Major City, or
on another Alexandria marker. The Egyptian Alexandria location is treated as a Transit Point until it is built (as a Minor City).
The Alexandria in Egypt must be built as part of Alexander’s
Deity victory condition.
To construct an Alexandria, the Macedonian Player simply places
an Alexandria counter in that Space or Transit Point during any
Admin Phase. Each Alexandria has a built-in garrison of 2 GSPs,
the deployment of which counts against Alexander’s garrison
maximum. Only one Alexandria may be built in each Admin
Phase. Once placed, they are removed if the Persian Player takes
control of the space. Alexandrias may not be rebuilt.

14.0 THE ROYAL FAMILY
There is a counter for the Royal Family: Darius’ wife,
daughters, assorted relatives and hangers-on. The
Family starts in Susa, with the Great King. It may
• stay in Susa
• move with The Great King
• move on its own (3 MPs per Action Round), as the Persian’s
Action for that Round.
If the Family is with Darius and he Flees, the Macedonians capture the Royal Family. If a Macedonian Army gains control of a
Space that contains the Royal Family, they capture the Family.
The Persian Player may not ‘destroy’ the counter. The Royal
Family counter has no military value or use. Alexander may declare he is marrying a member of the Royal Family (one of his

15.0 THUS SPAKE
ZARATHUSTRA: THE Z
CARDS
HISTORICAL NOTE: The state religion of the Persian Empire
was Zoroastrianism (today, they’re Parsees), ‘founded’ by
Zarathustra (Zoroaster in Greek) around 1000 BC. The ‘Z’ Deck
reflects the battle between Ahura Mazda (the ‘Good Guy’, and
no relation to the automobile) and Ahriman (the ‘Bad’ guy)...
the constant thread that runs through Zoroastrianism.
Each player starts the game with 3 Z Cards. They may play one
card (and must draw one) in each of their APM Rounds. The
‘one card play per Round’ restriction is waived for cards that
work in tandem (e.g., ‘Bagoas’). They may also Discard as many
Z cards from their hands as they wish. The maximum number of
Z cards a player may have in his Hand at any one time is five
(5). If a player starts his Action Round with 5 cards he must
discard at least one before drawing a new card.
PLAY NOTE: Part of the game’s tension stems from the ongoing decisions players must make as to which cards to keep at
any given moment.
Certain cards, noted with a [PAT], may be played at ‘any’ time
other than C/1 in the Action Phase, although ‘any’ is usually
specified on the card (and is generally obvious). PAT cards may
always be played in addition to the one card a player may (or
must) play in C/1.
Some cards are played only once (e.g., ‘Proskynesis’). They are
not placed in the Discard pile; they are set aside, out of the game.
Other cards may remain in play (in use, but not ‘in hand’). They
are not Discarded after play (e.g., ‘Diades’). All other cards are
Discarded after play, for possible re-use.
If no cards remain in the draw pile, or the ‘Fortunes of War’ card
is played, the Discards and any remaining unpicked cards are
shuffled again.
Each card has its own use, discussed below. Some cards have
multiple uses. Several cards can be used only in specific situations and, therefore, have little use for much of the game. Most
of the applications and usage are printed on the cards. The number of each card available for play is listed in brackets.
Ahriman in Bad Mood [2]. When played against your opponent, you get to do one of the following:

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

20

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

• blindly and randomly remove one card from his hand and Discard it. You may not look to see which card it is.
• cancel an Assassination attempt, but only if played before the
Assassination Attempt die roll is made. [PAT]
• cancel removal of all Devastation and Drought markers. [PAT]
Agis III, King of Sparta [1]. When played by Persia, Sparta is automatically in Revolt. (The Macedonian may not play this card.) Remove any Sparta
garrison, plus any garrisons in Crete (although Crete
is not in Revolt). Place the Spartan Army counter in Sparta with
5 ASPs. The Persian player controls and may use the Spartan
Army as if it were a Persian Army, although it may never leave
Europe. Once played, the card is removed from the game.
[Historical Note: Sparta was the sole city-state to not join Philip
of Macedon’s Corinthian League. Agis, after some soldier of
fortune activity in Crete (involving refugees from the battle of
Issus), raised the Spartan flag of revolt and laid siege to Megalopolis. He was soundly trashed by Antipater for his troubles.]
Ahura Mazda Smiles [2]. This card may be played only by the
Persian Player. When you play this card you may choose one of
the following:
• go through the Discards and take one of them for your hand,
or
• ignore Bad Weather for that APM [PAT], or
• save a leader targeted by ‘Illness’ from Death. When played
before the Illness die roll, it assures that the targeted Leader is
only out until the next Admin APM. [PAT]
DESIGN NOTE: This is one of our Persian leg-up cards.
Alexandrian Drunken Binge [1]. May be played only after Alexander is Great King. If Alexander is not yet Great King, this
card may not be used.
When played by the Persian, it earns Alexander one (1) Injury
Point ... and he rolls to see if he kills Black Cleitus. If he rolls an
odd number, he has killed his old friend in a drunken rage, and
the ‘Black Cleitus’ card may no longer be used.
When played by the Macedonian, remove one Weariness Point
from the Macedonian Army-the ‘Revelry and Debauchery are
Good for the Soul’ Theory-but roll for Black Cleitus, as above.
Alexander Goes Native [1]. This may be played only after Alexander is Great King. If Alexander is not yet Great King, this
card may not be played. It may be played only once.
Alexander orders all his generals, advisors, and sycophants to
adopt Persian dress and Persian court rituals. When played, the
following occur (it doesn’t matter who plays the card):

Assassin [2]. This card may be used against any Leader, including Diades. Roll a Die: 1-3 = the Leader is Dead; 4-6 = the Leader
Survives.
It may be played against Alexander, but if it results in ‘Dead’,
Alexander does not die. Instead, the Macedonian player rolls
one die and adds the result to Alexander’s Injury Track.
The ‘Bodyguard’ card may be used in defense of Alexander or
Darius, and the Macedonian can cancel any Assassination attempt on Alexander by playing Black Cleitus.
Attrition [2]. This card may be played immediately after your
opponent concludes movement [PAT]. If, during that move, your
opponent’s army either
• moved through a desert path, or
• spent more than 5 MPs,
roll one die, halving the result (round up fractions). That is the
number of ASPs your opponent loses to attrition. He may prevent this loss by Reducing a treasury within LOC.
Bad Weather [2]. This card may be played against any one Province. It triples the MP cost for any land movement into any Space
in that province, and adds one (+1) to the MP cost of all adjacent
provinces until the next Administrative Phase. Place a Bad
Weather marker to indicate this.
Bagoas [1]. The Achæmenid Royal Eunuch and Grand Vizier,
advisor to both Darius and Alexander, appears to have been rather
effectively wily and, at least in one source, somewhat ‘sinister’.
This card may be played to do any one of the following (some of
which will be [PAT] situations), after which it is discarded and
may eventually be used again:
• cancel the effects of a ‘Satrap Insubordination’ card
• halve the results of any Embezzlement (round up fractions)
• allow the Persian player to use the ‘Peucestas’ card (in tandem)
• allow the Macedonian player to use the ‘Assassin’ card (in
tandem) against Darius
• force the Persian player to add three (+3) to his Flight die roll,
if played by the Macedonian immediately upon Darius going
into Flight.
After play of this card, roll one die. If the die roll is a ‘6’, Bagoas
has died, and the card is permanently removed from the game.
HISTORICAL NOTE: Bagoas, whom several historians feel is
nothing more than convenient fiction, appears to have started
his career with Darius by elevating him to the throne, through
killing off his immediate predecessor and any possible other
interference. Sinister indeed.
Black Cleitus [1]. This card has some unusual properties.

• Add one (+1) to the Macedonian Weariness Track.
• The Persian player may immediately play a ‘Satrap Insubordination’ card, regardless of who played the ‘Alexander Goes
Native’ card.

The Macedonian Player may, after using it, retain it in his hand
for additional use by immediately discarding another card from
his hand (or he may discard it after use like any other card).

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

21

The card has no function for the Persian Player, other than as a
hand-held version of Passive Aggression. Does take up room in
the hand, though.

his funds and some more animated local talent. Designate a Treasury City and reduce it by one level. May not be played against
Pella or Memphis.

It may be played at any time Alexander is in danger of being
killed in a battle or by Assassination. If so, it cancels that ‘death’.
(See also the ‘Alexandrian Drunken Binge’ card.)

Greek Fleet [1]. The Greek Fleet becomes available to whoever
controls Greece. It starts in Athens. It remains in the game and
functions like any other Fleet.

HISTORICAL NOTE: Cleitus, Alexander’s best friend, singlehandedly saved Alexander’s life at The Granicus; Alexander
killed him during one of his drunken revelries.

Illness and Injury [2]. When played against an opponent’s
Leader, other than Alexander or Darius, roll the die. If the number is odd, that Leader has died from an illness. If the number is
even, his illness causes him to be removed from the game until
the next Administrative Phase. See the ‘Ahura Mazda’ Card.

Bodyguards [1]. Both kings had large contingents of bodyguards.
They were a mixed blessing. This card may be played against an
opponent’s ‘Assassin’ card [PAT]. Doing so cancels the use of
an ‘Assassin’ card. However, if the attempt is against Alexander,
the Persian Player may immediately play the ‘Conspiracy Revealed’ card, if he has one.
Command Indecision [2]. [PAT] This card is played the instant
an opponent chooses which Army or Fleet he is going to move
in that APM. The card player rolls one die. If the die roll is higher
than that Army Leader’s Battle Rating (or Admiral’s Naval Rating), that move (and Activation Phase) is cancelled.
Conspiracy Revealed [1]. There were several plots against
Alexander’s life during the campaign. When this card is played
(by the Persian, one assumes ... and it may be played as part of
an Assassination attempt - see the ‘Bodyguards’ card), the Macedonian player must choose one of the following results:
• the conspiracy fails. The Macedonian must add one (+1) to
the Army Weariness Track.
• he executes any one of his Leaders in Play, and the counter is
removed from the game. He then draws a new one randomly
to replace the executed leader.
The card is then discarded for later possible play.
HISTORICAL NOTE: Parmenion and several others of
Alexander’s generals went out this way.
Determined Troops [1]. This is played before your opponent
determines his battle losses. When played, it represents your army
having fought a decidedly vicious battle, and your opponent must
add one (+1) to his Loss die roll.
Diades of Thessaly [1]. Usable only by the Macedonian, Diades
was the pre-eminent engineer of his era. Once placed, he remains in play and provides a +1 DRM to all Siege Assaults. He
can be assassinated.
Drought [2]. This card is played against any one province. Place
the Drought marker in the chosen province. Drought affects all
paths in that province and all adjacent provinces. The MP costs
for LOC of paths in provinces suffering Drought are doubled,
and a player may not use a Province with Drought for Replenishment. Remove the Drought marker in the next Admin APM.
Embezzlement [1]. This card is played against your opponent.
When played, the player against whom it is played has had one
of his Treasury paymasters abscond to some Aegean isle with

When played by the Persian against Alexander, simply add one
(+1) IP to his Injury Level Track.
The card may not be played against Darius.
Major Campaign [2]. The Player may move two Armies, two
Fleets, or one Army and one Fleet during this Activation.
Mass Marriage [1]. May be played only by the Persian Player.
May only be played if Alexander controls the Royal Family. If
Alexander controls the Royal Family when this card is played,
he marries Darius’ eldest daughter, Stateira. He also forces his
immediate circle to marry Persian women. This adds one (+1) to
the Macedonian Weariness Track. (The forced mass marriage of
virtually all his generals and advisors was most unpopular.) This
satisfies the victory requirement that Alexander marry into the
Royal Family if he hasn’t already done so. Once played, discard
permanently.
Oligarchic Counter-Revolution [1]. This card applies only to
the Ionic provinces in Asia Minor: Mysia, Lydia, and Caria. The
Persian Player may place a garrison in any one Space therein
that is unoccupied. If that province was controlled by the Macedonian player, he loses control of the province until that garrison is removed.
Persians Gain Tactical Advantage [3]. [PAT] The Persian Player
(only) may use this in a land battle. He may double the Battle
Rating of any one of his Leaders.
Persians Increase Training and Tactics [2]. This card may be
used by the Persian player (only) to increase the Elite Level by
one of any one Persian Army that is at Elite Level ‘3’ or lower.
DESIGN NOTE: This is one of our Persian leg-up cards.
Peucestas [1]. Mr P. was the rather efficient Satrap of Persis.
This card may be played at any time. If the player who does so
controls Persis, he may raise 10 ASP at no cost. May be used by
the Persian, but only if he also plays the ‘Bagoas’ card at the
same time. May be used only once, after which it is removed
from the game.
Proskynesis [1]. This may be played only after Alexander is
Great King. Alexander orders all his generals, advisors, and sycophants to pay homage to him by the oriental act of prostration.
When played two things happen:

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

22

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

• The Macedonian Player gains a victory objective.
• Persian may follow it immediately with either a ‘Satrap Insubordination’ card or a ‘Conspiracy Revealed’ card.
If Alexander (the Macedonian player) has already invoked
Proskynesis without the card, the card may not be played by him
as well. In this case, if the Macedonian player draws the card, he
must immediately discard it and draw another.
Revolt [2]. When played, it is aimed at any province listed on
the Revolt table, regardless of who controls it. Roll the die. If
the die roll is less than or equal to that province’s Revolt Range,
that province is now In Revolt. Place an In Revolt marker in the
province.
Rhodes [1]. If Rhodes is not controlled by either player, the
player using this card may use the 1 NSP Rhodes Fleet at no
cost. That player retains control of this Fleet until:
• someone else gains control of Rhodes by Siege, at which point
that player now controls the 4 NSP Rhodes Fleet. Remove the
1 NSP Rhodes Fleet from the map.
• his opponent plays this card, at which point the Rhodes Fleet
is immediately returned to Rhodes and is controlled by noone.
Satrap Insubordination [2]. Both Darius and Alexander had a
fair amount of trouble with the satraps who governed their provinces. The card player may choose to do one of the following:
1) Treasury City Unusable: He may designate any one Treasure City as unusable until the next Administrative Phase.
The player may not trace a LOC to that city, although, if the
affected player is Persian, he may have Darius go there and
transfer any Talents into the Royal Treasury. May be cancelled by play of the ‘Bagoas’ card. Does not apply to Pella
or Susa.
2) Dissension in Eastern Holdings for Alexander: May be
played only after Alexander is Great King. Reports are filtering in that the Macedonian satraps in Babylonia,
Mesopotamia, Media, Matiene and all provinces east of those
are possibly running their own little kingdoms. Roll the die
for each province with a Macedonian garrison. If that die roll
is a 1-5, remove the garrison, but add the garrison GSPs to
Alexander’s Army as ASP.
HISTORICAL NOTE: this reflects Alexander’s Carmanian edict
of 324, in which he demobilized almost 10,000 oriental garrison troops, stripping the satraps of manpower, and adding those
men to his own army.
3) The Harpalus Incident. The Persian Player may remove
the Macedonian garrison of any one Macedonian-controlled
Treasure City (but not Pella), reduce the Treasury to Empty,
and roll for a Greek Revolt. This represents the incident in
which Alexander’s Babylonian treasurer, Harpalus, absconded with many talents and 6000 men, ending up in Athens fomenting a murky sort of rebellion.

4) Bad Blood in the Persian Army: the ‘Persian’ Leaders distrust the ‘non-Persian’ Leaders. For any one army that contains both, roll the die for each leader. The leader with the
higher die roll is removed from play, but is available for placing back in the game. May be cancelled by play of ‘Bagoas’
card.
Spies [3]. When played, the player may do one of following:
• look at all Z Cards in opponent’s hand
• take any one Z card from opponent’s hand, drawing blindly
• cancel the effect of any ‘Surprise’ card [PAT].
Storms at Sea [1]. This card may be played against any Naval
Movement using a Deep Sea path. Roll one die. If the die roll is
an odd number, all units in that movement have been destroyed
by storms. Otherwise, there is no effect.
Surprise [2]. [PAT]. If both players play a ‘Surprise’ card, they
each cancel the other out.
If played in a Land Battle, the card player adds two (+2) to his
Battle dice roll.
If played for Naval Combat, the player has a choice, as follows.
• If he is the defender, he may add two (+2) to any Avoidance
attempt.
• Either player during combat may use ‘Surprise’ in order to
roll first, applying his opponent’s losses before the opponent
rolls.
Terrain Advantage [2]. [PAT] When played by a Defending
Army, the Attacker must subtract one (–1) from his Battle dice
roll, as Defender has secured favorable terrain (probably a river).
May not be played by Attacking Army.
PLAY NOTE: It is possible to play the Surprise, Tactical Advantage and Terrain Advantage cards at once, and the effects
are cumulative.
The Honeymooners [1]. This card may be played only once in
the game. When played, the Macedonian Player removes 4 ASPs
from Alexander’s Army, temporarily. (He has sent the recently
married Macedonians home for a ‘horizontal holiday’.)
Reduce the Weariness Track by one (–1).
The 4 ASPs may be returned to any Macedonian Army during
the next Administrative Phase.
Treachery [1]. The defenders inside a Major City may have been
Sold Out by a traitor. If the besieging player is attempting to
Demand Surrender, playing this card adds three (+3) to that die
roll, but reduces the Treasury he is using for a LOC.
Continued on page 24

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

23

24

The Conquerors: Alexander the Great

16.0 SOLITAIRE PLAY
Alexander’s campaigns lend themselves rather well to the introspective, historical viewpoint benefits of solitaire play, as do the
APM play mechanics. Granted, you still have to wear two hats
in making movement and recruitment decisions, but the selection of APM allows you to select those chapeaux without too
much strain.
All of the normal rules are used. Who you represent is determined by the draw of the APM. When playing that APM you
play to win with that side. Cards are drawn and played as per the
rules-and, yes, you know what cards the ‘other’ player has.

SOURCES
The map information came mostly from the terrain and logistics
evaluations in Donald Engels’ Alexander the Great and the Logistics of the Macedonian Army, A.B. Bosworth’s Conquest and
Empire, J.M. Cook’s The Persians, The Penguin Historical Atlas of Ancient Greece, and The Barrington Atlas of the Greek
and Roman World. All of those, plus Robin Fox’s Alexander the
Great, were good, modern sources for the history... although there
are easily dozens of books available. If you want to get serious
in your readings, the best (but not the only) ancient sources are
Arrian, Curtius, and Diodorus.

Abbreviated Sequence of Play
A. APM Selection Phase
Either Player draws an APM from the APM Pool.

B. APM Replacement Phase
The APM from the previous Round is placed back in the
Pool.

C. Player Phase
1. Play Z Card Segment: If the Player has 5 Cards in his
hand he must either play a card or discard a card. If the player
discards, he may not play a card. No card may be played in
the First Round of the game, except for a card marked PAT.
2. Draw Z Card Segment
3. Activity Segment: The Player may now do one of the
following:
• Move and/or Fight with one of his Armies or Fleets
• Move and/or Fight with more than one of his Armies and/
or Fleets (if a Major Campaign Z Card was played)
• Move one Army and conduct Devastation
• Move any or all of his Leaders
• Move the Royal Family (if controlled by that Player)
• Raise new ASPs/NSPs and/or draw one additional Leader

Game Credits
GAME DESIGN:

Richard H. Berg

DEVELOPMENT: William
ART DIRECTOR:

• Declare an Administrative Phase (Note: this may never be
done twice in succession).

F. Ramsay, Jr.

Rodger MacGowan

BOX ART AND PACKAGE DESIGN:
MAP ART:

• Reorganize the ASPs between two or more of his armies,
if they are Stacked together

4. Siege Assault Segment

Rodger MacGowan

Mark Mahaffey

CARD LAYOUT AND DESIGN:
COUNTERS: Rodger
RULES LAYOUT:

5. Victory Determination Segment
Knut Grünitz

D. Administrative Phase

MacGowan, Mark Simonitch

1. Both Players may try to Replenish their Treasuries.

Mark Simonitch

PROOFREADING: Tom Wilde

2. Both Players may remove or reduce any Garrisons.

and Steve Carey

PLAYTESTING: David Fox; The NY Metropolitan Wargaming

Club (Peter Stein, Ed Harmon, John Lynch), Jeremy
Billones, Mark Herman, Robert Keough, Harvey Mossman
PRODUCTION COORDINATION: Tony

Curtis

PRODUCERS: Tony Curtis, Rodger MacGowan, Andy Lewis,

Gene Billingsley and Mark Simonitch

3. All Devastated, Drought, Bad Weather, and Battle Fatigue
markers are removed. ‘Useless’ markers may be removed.
4. Alexander may build an ‘Alexandria’.
5. If the Alexander Injury Level track is at 20 or more, Alexander undergoes an Injury Effect Check.
6. If necessary, the Macedonians undergo a Weariness check.

GMT Games, LLC
P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
www.GMTGames.com
© 2006 GMT Games, LLC

