© Copyright GMT Games 1999

Table of Contents
1.0 Components .................................................................................................................................................. 2
2. 0 Object............................................................................................................................................................ 2
3.0 The Map ....................................................................................................................................................... 2
4.0 The Playing Pieces ......................................................................................................................................... 3
5.0 Preparing For Play ........................................................................................................................................ 3
6.0 Sequence of Play ........................................................................................................................................... 4
7.0 Area Occupation Limits ................................................................................................................................ 4
8.0 Activation/Movement ................................................................................................................................... 4
9.0 Combat ......................................................................................................................................................... 5
10.0 Bridges ........................................................................................................................................................ 7
11.0 Reinforcements ........................................................................................................................................... 8
12.0 Victory Determination ................................................................................................................................ 8
13.0 Supply ......................................................................................................................................................... 9
14.0 German Special Forces ................................................................................................................................ 9
Introductory Scenario: The 7th Army Attacks ................................................................................................. 10
Scenario: The 5th Panzer Army vs: VIII Corps ................................................................................................. 10
Scenario: The First Three Days ......................................................................................................................... 10
The Campaign Scenario .................................................................................................................................... 11
Examples of Play ................................................................................................................................................ 11
Designer’s Notes ................................................................................................................................................ 13
Play Strategy ...................................................................................................................................................... 15
Bibliography ....................................................................................................................................................... 15

Tigers in The Mist

1.0 Components

3.0 The Map

Tigers in the Mist contains the following
parts:

The mapboard portrays the critical
geographical area where the actual
campaign took place.

• 22” x 34” mapsheet
• One Rulebook

3.1 Scale

• Two sheets of counters and markers
• Four ten sided dice. A die roll of “0” or
is always considered to be a 10.

The scale is approximately one inch equals
four miles.

• Five Scenario Cards
• One Player Aid Card.

2. 0 Object
Tigers in the Mist is a two-player game.
One player commands the German forces
and the other player controls the Allied
forces. The object of the game is to control
some or all of the victory point areas at the
end of each turn, or for the Germans, to
move units into the perimeter zones that
score victory points for exiting units. The
winner is determined by the number of
victory points the German has managed to
obtain by the end of the last game turn.
The game simulates the early stages of the
German offensive in the Ardennes section
of western Europe (Germany, France,
Belgium, and Luxembourg) in December
of 1944. Historically, the Germans planned
to break through the thin American defenses
in this area, cross the Meuse River, and seize
the port of Antwerp in Holland. The
German high command hoped that success
would force a political settlement on the
Western Front, thus allowing Germany to
direct its full attention to defeating the
Russians. In order to win the game, the
German player will almost certainly have to
get some units across the Meuse River.

3.2 Map Components
3.21 Perimeter zones are locations around
the edges of the map which are identified
by large capital letters. These are used to
bring on reinforcements and act as supply
sources. The Germans can score victory
points by entering some of the Allied
controlled zones.
3.22 Areas are irregularly-shaped spaces on
the map. Each area represents a city, town, or
crossroads. Each area is named and identified
by a unique number. The area numbering
system may be used to facilitate PBM or
PBEM play as well as to aid in locating a
particular area. The system is set up such that
a numbered area is always adjacent to
consecutive areas in the numbering sequence,
ie. 75 is adjacent to 74 and 76.
Areas are connected by roads. Brown lines
are minor roads. Gray lines are major roads.
Units move from area to area along roads.
Units may not move to an adjacent area
unless it is connected to the area moved
from by a road.
3.23 Significant rivers are shown on the
map. Where a road crosses a river, a bridge
is shown. Except as noted under section 5.1,
all bridges are intact at the start of the game.
3.24 National boundaries, woods,
marshland, and towns are shown purely for
informational and historical purposes. They
have no bearing on the game.
3.25 The original Allied front line areas
have their ID numbers circled in black.
This was done to facilitate determination
of German artillery availability.
3.26 Some areas have victory point values
printed inside a circle. The German player
receives these points at the end of each
game turn that he controls a VP area.

Page 2

3.27 Some areas result in the release of
reserve German Panzer divisions. These
areas contain a printed tank silhouette.
3.28 Some perimeter zones have victory
point multipliers printed inside a square.
The German player receives victory points
equal to the number of German strength
points present in the zone at the end of the
game multiplied by the victory point
multiplier.
3.29 The Turn Record Track and the
Victory Point Track are shown on the
mapboard.

How to Read the Counters
Unit Type
(Armor)

Set Up Area

Strength Points

Movement
Restriction

Unit ID
Impulse of Entry
for Reinforcements

Attack Factor

Defense Factor

Artillery Counter

Background Color
denotes nationality

Unit Counter Summary
Engineer (Infantry Type Unit)
Wheels Denote Motorized Unit

Armor

Mechanized Infantry

Motorized Infantry

Airborne Infantry
(No Paradrop Capability)
Foot Infantry
Units w/o Unit ID
are substitute counters.
German Special Forces Unit
Turns unit may be used

Rules Booklet

The Battle of the Bulge

4.0 The Playing Pieces
Included within the game are different
colored die cut playing pieces. Most of the
counters represent combat units. There are
also numerous informational counters.

4.13 Combat units present at the start of
the game and reinforcements have
battalion, brigade, divisional, corps, or army
identifiers to the left of their unit type
symbol. Unit counters without identifiers
are substitutes used to represent units that
have lost strength due to combat casualties.
All of the unit counters are backprinted.

4.1 Combat Units
4.11 There are five basic types of combat
units in the game: armor, mechanized,
motorized, engineer, and foot infantry.
Each type of unit has a unique symbol in
the center of the counter to indicate its
type. Some of the infantry type units are
airborne units, but they do not have any
airdrop capability.
4.12 There are several different colors of
counters which distinguish unit nationality,
or for the Germans, SS, Wehrmacht, or
Luftwaffe units. SS units are black,
Wehrmacht unit are grey, and Luftwaffe
units are light blue. American units are
green. British units are khaki. Allied
garrison units (99 Norwegian and V Belgian
Fusiliers) are dark blue.
Informational Marker Summary

4.14 Numbers to the right side of their unit
type symbols are either set up locations for
units beginning the game on the board or
impulse of arrival for reinforcements.

Victory Points

Blown Bridge

Bridge Repair Modifier

German Stack has Moved
Combat not Resolved
Allied Stack has Moved
Combat not Resolved
German Stack has Moved
Combat Resolved
Allied Stack has Moved
Combat Resolved

Copyright © GMT Games, 1999

The following bridges are blown at game
start. Place a blown bridge marker on each.
• Wahlerscheid-Monschau (40-41)
• Dasburg-Marnach (51-70)

4.16 The large number in the bottom center
of each combat unit is its strength. A units
strength is the number of hits it can take
before being destroyed and also is the
number of dice it rolls when firing in a
battle.

• Irrel-Echternach (10-11)

• Nusbaum-Beaufort (19-20)

To aid in set-up, these bridges are indicated
on the map as Blown.

5.2 Place Units and Markers
4.17 Each unit has an attack, defense, and
movement factor which varies by type of
unit. These factors are not shown on the
counters, but are shown on the chart below.
The numbers are left to right: attackdefense-movement.

Engineer 3-4-8

Motorized Infantry 3-4-8
Foot Infantry 3-4-5
Artillery 3-5-X

Battle Location

5.1 Place Blown Bridges

• Gemund-Holzhum (55-69)

Mechanized Infantry 3-4-8
Turn/Impulse

Perform the following steps to set up the
game.

4.15 Substitute counters have a white bar
over the unit symbol.

Armor 4-5-8
Entrenchment

5.0 Preparing For Play

4.18 When attacking, the left most number
is the basic to hit number used in combat.
When defending, the center number is the
basic to hit number used in combat. The
movement allowance is always the same,
except that infantry type units may
voluntarily reduce their movement to that
of foot infantry in order to cross a river at a
blown bridge.

4.2 Informational Markers
Informational markers are provided for
turn record, battle location, victory points,
blown bridges, bridge repair modifiers,
entrenchments, Out of Supply status, and
movement completed indicators.

5.21 Place the units that begin the game on
the board in their correct starting areas as
indicated on the Order of Battle Cards.
5.22 Place “entrenched” counters on units
that are indicated to start the game in
entrenchments.
5.23 Only those Allied units that have a
white triangle in the bottom right corner of
their counter are eligible to move on the first
impulse of December 16. No other Allied
units may move on that impulse. Any Allied
unit (except armor or units in areas where
German units are present) may entrench on
the first impulse of December 16.
5.24 German units that have a red triangle
in the bottom right corner of their counter
may not move until the second impulse of
December 16.

5.3 Set Initial Track Values
5.31 Place the “Turn” counter on the 16-1
space of the Turn Record Track located on
the mapboard.
5.32 Place the”VP” marker near the VP
Track. Starting VP level is always “0.”

Page 3

Tigers in The Mist

6.0 Sequence of Play
I. Reinforcement/Replacement Phase: Both
players consult their respective Order of
Battle cards and place units scheduled to
arrive in the current impulse in the entry
zone listed for each reinforcing unit.
II. First German Impulse:
1. The German player may move as many
or as few of his units as he wishes
including available reinforcements.
2. Eligible Allied units may attempt
bridge demolition while the German player is moving.
Exception: The Allied player may
not attempt bridge demolition on any
impulse of December 16.
3. After the German player has completed his movement for the impulse,
both players resolve all battles which
result from the German movement.
4. Eligible German Engineer units may
attempt to construct bridges.
III.First Allied Impulse:
1. The Allied player may move as many
or as few of his units as he wishes
including available reinforcements.
2. Eligible German units may attempt
bridge demolition while the Allied
player is moving.
3. After the Allied player has completed his movement for the impulse, both players resolve all battles
which result from the Allied movement.
4. Eligible Allied Engineer units may
attempt to construct bridges.
IV-VII. Steps II and III above are repeated
until each player has completed three movement/combat impulses. This constitutes a
full turn which represents a 24 hour period.
Exception: Each player is allowed only
one movement/combat impulse on the
December 22 turn.
VIII. Attrition Phase: Determine Supply
[13.11] for all units (of each side). Remove one strength point from each unit
that is Out of Supply [13.21].
IX. Victory Detemination Phase: Victory
points (VPs) are determined at the end of
each turn. Adjust the VP counter on the
Page 4

VP Track. Move the turn counter to the
next space on the Turn Record Track after
both sides have completed their movement
and combat for the impulse.

7.0 Area Occupation Limits
7.1 Each player may have a maximum of 4
unit counters with a maximum total of 10
strength points occupying an area at the
end of any movement impulse.
Important Exception: During set up,
there are two locations where the German
player exceeds the stacking limits. At the
end of the 3rd impulse of the December 16
turn, rule 7.2 will apply to these two areas.
During the December 16 turn, German
units may not be moved so as to create new
stacks or add to existing stacks such that the
number of strength points exceeds ten or the
number of units exceeds four.
7.2 If at the end of any movement impulse
a player has more units and/or strength
points occupying an area than is allowed
under rule 7.1, he must eliminate sufficient
units (not strength points) of his choice to
bring the total down to the maximum
allowed.
7.3 Any number of units and strength
points may occupy a perimeter zone.

8.0 Activation/Movement
8.1 Impulses
Each daily turn is divided into six player
impulses, a total of three for each side.
Each impulse in shown on the Time Record
Chart on the map and is labelled 16-1,
16-2, etc. The first number is the day, the
second the impulse. These impulses are
alternated between players with the
German player always moving first. Refer
to the Sequence of Play in section 6.0.

8.2 Movement
Units move from area to area along roads.
Units may not move to an adjacent area
unless it is connected to the area moved
from by a road.
8.21 Units may move as stacks or
individually. Only units beginning the turn
together in an area may move as a stack.
8.22 Units must stop upon entering an
area containing enemy units, and they
may move no further that turn.
8.23 When units of one side enter an area
containing units of the other side, the moving
units must attack all enemy units present.
8.24 Once a unit or stack of units has
completed its movement for the turn, it
should be marked with a “movement
completed” counter. Units that moved,
but did not enter an enemy occupied area,
place the movement completed counter
with the nationality symbol up. Units
that moved into enemy occupied areas
place the movement completed counter
with the arrow and the nationality symbol
face up. As each battle is resolved, flip the
movement completed counter to the side
without the arrow.
8.25 Units which moved in an earlier
impulse of the turn may not move again
during the turn or join in any combat as
attackers.
8.26 Entering a zone, whether occupied or
not, costs only the MP for the road.
8.27 Units may not move from one enemy
occupied area directly to another enemy
occupied area.
Rules Booklet

The Battle of the Bulge
8.28 Units may not move so as to place
themselves Out of Supply (OoS). [13.0]

8.38 If a unit does not have sufficient
movement points to move to an area, it
may not make that move.

8.29 OoS units may move only one area.

8.3 Movement Allowance/Costs
8.31 Armor, Mechanized, Motorized, and
Engineer units may spend eight (8)
movement points per turn.
8.32 Foot infantry units may spend five (5)
movement points per turn.
8.33 Movement Costs to move from area
to area:
Area Entered

Cost in MPs

Along Major Road

1

Along Minor Road

2

Across Unbridged River

3 (as foot inf. only [8.34-5])

8.34 Mechanized, Motorized, or Engineer
moving as foot infantry have may spend 5
MPs per turn. There is no road cost in
addition to the 3 MP cost for crossing an
unbridged river.
8.35 An infantry type unit with 8 MPs may
voluntarily reduce its MPs for a turn to 5 in
order to cross a river at a blown bridge. Units
that exercise this option must continue to
move at a rate of 5 MP per turn until they
can trace a line of supply back to a friendly
supply source without the supply line crossing
a blown bridge. Once this is achieved, the
units revert to their normal MPs.
8.36 Additional costs (cumulative)

Action

Cost in MPs

Enter Occupied Area

1

Leave EnemyOccupied Area

1

Bridge Blown While
Attempting to Cross

1

Entrench

4 (Engineers)
All MPs (Other Inf. Types)

Construct Bridge

All MPs (Engineers only)

8.37 It costs one additional movement point
to enter an occupied area; whether the
occupying units are enemy and/or friendly.
Copyright © GMT Games, 1999

8.39 After the moving player has finished
moving his units, both players resolve all
battles which result from the moving
player’s movement for that impulse.

8.4 Bridge Demolition
8.41 During movement, the non-moving
player may attempt bridge demolition
whenever a moving unit attempts to cross
a bridge where a non-moving infantry type
unit is present in an area adjacent to that
bridge [10.2].
8.42 If the bridge demolition attempt is
successful, the moving player may alter the
remainder of the move of his moving stack
from the area adjacent to the blown bridge.
However, the currently moving stack expends
one MP due to the forced change of direction.

8.5 Entrenching
8.51 Infantry type units may entrench during
any friendly impulse. Each unit must
entrench individually. Units cannot use
entrenchments constructed by other units.
8.52 Engineers may entrench by expending 4
movement points. Thus engineers may move
(expending up to 4 MPs) and then entrench.
8.53 Other Infantry-type units entrench
by expending all of their movement points.
8.54 Armor units may not entrench.
8.55 Units may not entrench when enemy
units are present in the same area.
8.56 Defending entrenched units get a +1
DRM for shots taken against them.
8.57 Indicate entrenched units by placing
them underneath an “entrenched” counter.
The number of entrenchments allowed on
the board at one time is not restricted by
the number of entrenchment counters
provided in the game.
8.58 Entrenchments are removed from the
board if abandoned by the occupying unit
or if the occupying unit is destroyed.

8.59 Attacking units can never be in
entrenchments. Thus units which attack
must abandon their entrenchments. The
entrenchments are then removed [8.58].

9.0 Combat
Once the moving player has completed all
his movement for the impulse, combat is
resolved. Battles are fought in any order
that the moving player chooses.

9.1 General
9.11 A unit may attack only once per turn,
during one of the moving player’s impulses. A
unit may defend up to three times per turn—
once in each of the enemy player’s impulses.
9.12 Units of the moving player that enter
an area containing enemy units during the
current impulse are required to attack.
9.13 Units of the moving player that begin an
impulse in the same area with enemy units
have the options to attack, move elsewhere,
or remain in place without attacking.
9.14 When units of the moving player
enter an area that contains both enemy and
friendly units, the moving units must attack
(per 9.12) and the non-moving friendly
units already in the area must exercise one
of the options in 9.13. However, if such
friendly units choose to remain in place
without attacking, they still receive a Moved
marker and cannot move or attack in a later
impulse of the same turn.
9.15 Defending units do not have the option
to decline combat.
9.16 A unit may not move in the same turn
after it has conducted an attack.
9.17 No combat can occur in perimeter
zones.

9.2 Process and Hits
9.21 Each unit present in a battle fires at a
target by rolling one die for each strength
point of the firing unit. If the die roll is equal
to or less than the combat factor of the firing
unit, it scores a hit which causes the target to
lose one strength point. A one strength
point unit is destroyed if it takes a hit.
Page 5

Tigers in The Mist
9.22 Excess hits against a target may not be
carried over against other enemy units
present in a battle.
9.23 Units that are hit in combat are either
flipped to their reverse side, replaced with
a substitute counter, or destroyed. For
example, a 4 strength point unit that is hit
once would be flipped to become a 3. If hit
twice, it would be replaced with a 2. If hit
4 times, it would be destroyed and removed
from the board.

9.3 Combat Sequence
9.31 Determine artillery availability for both
sides.
9.32 Defender’s artillery fires; hits take
effect.
9.33 Defender selects targets for his shots.
9.34 Defending units fire; hits take effect.
9.35 Attacker’s artillery fires; hits take effect.
9.36 Attacker selects targets for his shots.
9.37 Attacking units fire; hits take effect.
9.38 Combat ends for the impulse in that
area.
9.39 Proceed to the next area where combat
occurs until all combat for the impulse has
been resolved.

9.4 Artillery
9.41 Artillery is represented abstractly in
the game. Each attacking or defending
stack is assumed to have the possibility of
artillery support during any impulse. The
players roll dice for each artillery unit they
are eligible to call on for support.
9.42 Artillery Call: Each player may make
1 call for artillery support for every 3 strength
points he has present in a battle. The
defender always gets a minimum of one
call. Strength points are counted prior to
any defensive fire. A player does not get
credit toward a call for artillery for fractions
of strength points.
Example: 5 strength points generate one
artillery call.
Page 6

A stack of units may call for artillery in each
battle in which it is a participant.
9.43 Allied artillery is available on a DR
1-8.
9.44 German artillery is available on a DR
1-6 against the original Allied front line
(areas with area # in white circle only).
9.45 German artillery is available on a DR
1-4 in all other areas, including those East
of the original Allied front line.
9.46 Available artillery counters (one per
successful call) are targeted on enemy units
prior to resolving each sides fire. Artillery
must fire at the type of enemy unit with the
most strength points present in the battle
being fought. The firing player may select
the target unit when more than one unit of
the same type is present. Once a unit has
been targeted by an artillery counter, the
strength points of that counter are
subtracted from the total strength points of
that type for purposes of determining the
next eligible target unit for artillery fire.
Additional artillery shots are allocated
similarly. [See the examples of play.]
More than one artillery counter may not be
targeted on a unit unless all other units in
the battle have also been targeted by
artillery.
9.47 Once the targets for artillery fire have
been determined, a DR is made for each
target unit. Note that it is possible for two
or more artillery shots to land on a single
unit. If the earlier shots destroy the unit,
the remaining artillery shots against that
unit would be lost.
9.48 Artillery supporting the attacker hits
on a DR of 1-3. Artillery supporting the
defender hits on a DR of 1-5.
9.49 Artillery shots are influenced by
entrenchment, river crossing, and combined
arms die roll modifiers (DRMs). Such
influence is cumulative.

9.5 Combat Between Units
9.51 Unit quality. There is a hierarchy of
unit quality in the game. Unit qualities,
from highest to lowest, are: Engineer,
Armor, Mechanized, Motorized, Foot
Infantry.

9.52 Units must shoot at equal or lower
quality units if possible. Units may not fire
at a target of higher quality than themselves
unless there are no other eligible targets.
When all eligible targets are of higher
quality than the firing unit, it must fire at
the lowest quality target available.
9.53 Defending (or non-moving) units are
not required to shoot at attacking units
that are only one strength point.
Exception: See 9.55.
9.54 Units attacking or defending alone in
an area may fire at any enemy unit, subject
to rules 9.52 and 9.53. Multiple attacking
and defending units must allocate their fire
according to rules 9.52 through 9.57. Rule
9.55 takes precedence over rule 9.53.
9.55 In a multiple unit battle, the firing
player must shoot at each target unit with
at least one unit of his own before he can
allocate a second firing unit to any target.
He must shoot at each target unit with at
least two units of his own before he can
allocate a third firing unit to any target.
9.56 Once each target unit has been
allocated an attacker, the firing player may
allocate his remaining units to the available
targets any way he wishes, subject to the
restrictions of rule 9.55.
9.57 In a multiple unit battle, firing units are
allocated to target units in order of unit quality,
from high to low. In multiple unit battles,
firing units must shoot at equal quality targets
if possible. If no equal targets are available,
then the highest quality target of lesser quality
than the firing unit must be selected. If no
lesser quality targets are available, then the
lowest quality target of higher quality than the
firing unit must be selected. Unit strengths
have no effect on this rule.
Exception: See 9.53
Example: The firing side has an armor, a
mechanized, and two foot infantry. The
target side has an engineer, a motorized
unit and an armor unit. The armor must
fire at the armor, since it is equal to the
highest quality firing unit. The mechanized
unit is forced to fire at the motorized target
unit. One of the infantry (firers choice)
then may fire at the engineer. The
remaining unit may fire at any of the three
target units.
Rules Booklet

The Battle of the Bulge
9.58 A unit may not split its strength to fire
at more than one target unit.

10.0 Bridges

10.2 Bridge Demolition.

Bridges may be constructed or demolished.

10.21 During Movement, the non-moving
player may attempt bridge demolition by
making a Demolition Dieroll whenever a
moving unit attempts to cross a bridge
where a non-moving infantry type unit is
present in an area adjacent to that bridge.
Bridge demolition may only be attempted
at the instant that an enemy unit attempts
to cross a bridge.

9.59 All firing units must be allocated to
target units prior to resolving any shots.
[9.3.]

10.1 Bridge Construction.

9.6 Combined Arms

10.11 Only Engineer units may construct
bridges.

Where the attacker has infantry, armor, and
artillery in his attack, there is no DRM to
combat. Where the attacker does not have
infantry, armor, and artillery in his attack,
all defending shots get a -1 DRM. For
artillery to be available for the attack, a
successful call for artillery support must
have been made.

9.7 Combat Modifiers (DRMs)
9.71 Combat Die Roll Modifiers (DRMs)
are as follows:
Whose Fire?

Condition

DRM

10.12 To build a bridge, the Engineer
must begin the turn in an area adjacent to
the bridge site. There must also be a
friendly unit (any type) in the area at the
other end of the bridge, however the second
unit could have moved there during the
current impulse.
10.13 An Engineer may not attempt bridge
construction if an enemy unit is present in
its area. Enemy units may be present in the
second area connected to the bridge without
affecting bridge construction.
10.14 An Engineer may not move or
attack in the same turn in which it attempts
bridge construction. An Engineer may not
attempt bridge construction during the
same impulse a battle takes place in the
area it (the Engineer) occupies.

Attacker

vs. Entrenched Units

+1

Att/Def

Firing units out of Supply

+1

Defender

vs. non-Combined Arms Force

-1

10.15 Bridge construction is successful on
a DR of 1-4

Defender

vs. units crossing a river
(bridged or not). This only
applies when all attacking
units just moved into the area.

-1

10.16 The Engineer may attempt
construction once each impulse until
successful. After each unsuccessful bridge
construction attempt, the next attempt is
given a -1 DRM. These are additive per
impulse, therefore the 2nd attempt to repair
a particular bridge is successful on a DR of
1-5, the 3rd attempt on a DR of 1-6, etc.
Place the appropriate construction DRM
marker on the bridge after each failed
attempt. Construction DRM markers
remain in place even if the Engineer moves
away from the bridge under repair prior to
a successful construction die roll.

9.72 Units that are being attacked by units
coming from two different areas where one
attacking group crossed a river and the
other did not do not receive the -1 DRM to
defensive shots conferred by river defense.
9.73 Units that are being attacked by units
coming across a river do not receive the -1
DRM to defensive shots conferred by river
defense if any enemy units (whether eligible
to attack this impulse or not) began the
impulse in the defenders area.
9.74 All combat DRMs are cumulative.

Copyright © GMT Games, 1999

10.17 Having two engineers adjacent to a
bridge does not increase the chances of
successful construction. No more than one
construction attempt per bridge per impulse
may be made.

10.22 Any infantry type unit (Engineer,
Mechanized, Motorized, Foot) may attempt
bridge demolition. Armor units may not attempt
bridge demolition. The unit attempting
demolition must be in an area adjacent to the
bridge it is attempting to demolish.
10.23 A unit (if eligible) may attempt bridge
demolition during each impulse of a turn.
It may attempt to demolish up to two
bridges per impulse. Bridge demolition
does not count as a move.
10.24 A unit may not attempt bridge
demolition if an enemy unit begins the
current impulse in its area.
10.25 Two or more different units may not
each attempt to demolish a single bridge in
the same impulse.
10.26 Allied units may not attempt to
demolish bridges on December 16.
10.27 Entrenching does not adversely affect
a unit’s bridge demolition die roll.
10.28 The number of blown bridges allowed
on the board at one time is not restricted by
the number of blown bridge counters
provided in the game.
10.29 The Demolition Dieroll. Roll one
die and refer to the type of unit attempting
demolition. If the die result falls within the
listed range, Demolition succeeds. Place a
Demolished bridge marker on the bridge.
Unit Type and Move Status

Success Range

Engineers not moved this turn

1-8

Engineers that moved this turn

1-4

Other Infantry not moved this turn

1-4

Other Infantry that moved this turn

1-2

Page 7

Tigers in The Mist

11.0 Reinforcements
11.1 Placement and Movement

11.32 Release Areas are indicated on the
mapboard with tank silhouettes.

12.0 Victory Determination

11.11 Place reinforcing units on the
perimeter (entry) zone indicated on the
OB Reinforcements Cards.

12.1 General

11.12 Reinforcements may move onto the
board on the impulse of arrival.

12.11 Victory points (VPs) are counted at
the end of each turn.

11.13 A major road is assumed to connect
each perimeter zone to the adjacent area on
the board.

12.12 Only the German player can score
victory points.

11.14 Reinforcements may enter via an
adjacent perimeter zone one impulse
following the scheduled impulse of arrival,
if desired. The shifting units also expend
two MPs to do so. Similar restrictions
apply to entering two or more zones away.
The reinforcements arrive one impulse later
and pay 2 MPs for each zone shifted.
11.15 A player may deliberately delay
moving reinforcements from a zone if he so
desires.

11.2 Restrictions
11.21 Allied reinforcements may not enter
via a zone occupied by German units.
German units may enter a victory point
zone occupied by Allied units. The entering
units do not pay an extra movement point
to enter an occupied zone. No combat
occurs in zones.
11.22 German units may not enter
perimeter zones L, M, N, or P.

A unit not “in supply” is considered “Out of
Supply” (OoS).

12.2 Control and VPs

13.13 Supply may be traced from a
contested area to a perimeter zone.

12.21 Several areas score VPs for the
German when he is the controlling player.

13.14 Supply may only be traced across
intact bridges.

12.22 A player controls an area by being
the last player who was in sole possession of
the area. When both players have units in
an area, the player which last had exclusive
control of the area at the end of any player
Impulse is considered to have control, even
if outnumbered. VP areas score points each
turn they are controlled by the German
Player.

Exception: Infantry type units may trace
supply across (only) one blown bridge.

12.23 The German player may also score
VPs for occupying certain perimeter zones
originally controlled by the Allied player.
The number of points scored is equal to the
German strength points in the zone
multiplied by the factor in the zone (1-3).
Each strength point in a VP zone scores
points only once per game.

11.3 Contingent Reinforcements

12.25 Once German units have entered an
Allied VP zone, they may not return to the
board.

Page 8

13.11 A unit is “in supply” if it can trace a route
free of enemy units back to a perimeter zone
originally controlled by its side. For the
Germans, these are zones A-C. For the Allies,
zones D-P.Supply must be traced along roads.

13.12 Supply may not be traced through
enemy-occupied areas or to an enemyoccupied zone.

12.24 German units in a VP zone which
are out of supply at the end of the game or
scenario do not score VPs.

11.31 The Reserve Panzer Reinforcement
release areas and units are noted on the
German Reinforcements OB Cards.

13.1 Determining/Tracing Supply

12.13 The VP total is always zero (“0”) at
the start of a scenario.

11.23 Allied units may not enter perimeter
zones A, B, or C.

Some German reinforcements are released
contingent upon the German player having
superiority in certain areas. Superiority is
defined as a greater number of strength
points in the area at the end of any Allied
impulse.

13.0 Supply

13.15 Supply status for movement
purposes is determined prior to movement.
13.16 Supply status for combat is
determined after movement and
immediately prior to resolution of combat.
13.17 Supply status for attrition is
determined during the Attrition Phase.

13.2 Out of Supply Effects
13.21 Attrition: Each counter present that
is OoS during the Attrition Phase must
immediately lose one strength point.
13.22 Combat: OoS units may attack, but
units that are OoS do not get artillery support.
13.23 Movement:
1. Units may not move so as to place
themselves OoS.
2. OoS units may only move one area, then
must end their movement for the turn.
3. OoS engineers may move and entrench.
4. OoS infantry may entrench in place.
13.24 OoS units may not attempt to build
or blow bridges.
Rules Booklet

The Battle of the Bulge

14.0 German Special Forces
The Germans had several special units in
the battle, the von der Heydte parachute
unit, Greif commando teams, and on several
occasions led assaults with captured US
Sherman tanks to confuse the defenders.
This section of the rules reflect the roles of
these special forces.

14.1 Availability and Placement
14.11 One Special Forces counter is
available for use on one impulse in each of
the December 17th, 18th, and 19th turns.
If the Special Forces counter is not used
during the turn, it is forfeited. Special
Forces may not be accumulated for use on
a later turn.
14.12 At any time during his movement
portion of an impulse, the German player
places the Special Forces counter in any
non-victory point area he wishes. He may
not place the counter in a zone. The area
may contain Allied units.

14.2 Effects
14.21 The German Player may choose the
Special Force to have one of the following
three effects. Once an effect has been
used, it may not be used again in the game.
A different effect must be chosen in
subsequent turns.

Copyright © GMT Games, 1999

14.22 Restrict Allied Mobility Through
an Area: Allied units entering an area
containing the Special Forces counter must
expend one extra MP to enter the area.
Allied units exiting an area containing the
Special Forces counter must expend one
extra MP to exit the area. Both entering
and exiting penalties can apply to the same
Allied unit. This effect may not be chosen
on the 3rd impulse of any turn.

14.3 Removal

14.23 Interference with Bridge
Demolition: The Special Forces counter
may interfere with bridge demolition. This
could affect all bridges connected to the
area containing the Special Forces counter.
The Special Forces counter must be placed
in the same area as the US units which will
be attempting the demolition. When this
effect is chosen by the German Player,
bridge demolition is only successful on a
die roll of one. A separate die is rolled for
each affected bridge.

Ray Freeman
1422 Peralta Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94702
(510) 525-0173
E-Mail: RayFreeman@aol.com

14.24 Battlefield Confusion: The Special
Forces counter may be used to affect the to
hit values of all Allied units in a battle. All
Allied fire in the designated battle,
including artillery, suffers a +1 DRM.
German fire in this battle remains
unaffected.

The Special Forces counter is removed at
the end of the Allied portion of the impulse
in which it was placed.

Questions?
Direct all questions to:

Support
For the latest “Living” rules, hints on play,
updates, and enhancements to TiTM,
check out the GMT Games website at
www.gmtgames.com. This site includes a
discussion board where you can pose your
questions or compare strategies with the
game’s designer, Ray Freeman, as well as
fellow players.
And while you’re on the web, check out the
excellent consimworld site and discussion
board run by John Kranz. It’s at
www.consimworld.com. We highly
recommend it for anyone with an interest
in wargames.

Page 9

Tigers in The Mist

Introductory Scenario:

Scenario: The 5th Panzer

The 7th Army Attacks

Army vs: VIII Corps

Map Area

Map Area

Allied supply sources are zones G through
K. The scenario ends at the end of the
German December 22-1 impulse. The
bridge at Diekirch-Ettlebruck begins the
scenario blown. All other normal rules for
the Campaign Game are in effect.

All areas and perimeter zones south and
east of the green scenario line on the map.

All areas and perimeter zones within the
red colored scenario lines on the map.

Victory Conditions

Units

Units

German: 212 VG, 276 VG, 352 VG,
47-2 Eng, 605 Eng, 44 MG, 7A PzJgr,
7A/15 Flak.

German: 18 VG, 244 Stg, 62 VG,
LVIII/1 Flak, 560 VG, 116 Pz, 182 Flak,
Lehr, 600 Eng, 2 Pz, 207 Eng, 26 VG,
5 FJ, 47-1 Eng, 352 VG unit at Sinspelt.

German Decisive: 16 or more VP
German Tactical: 13-15 VP
Draw: 10-12 VP
Allied Tactical: 7-9 VP

Also: 614 JgPz, 653 JgPz.
Special Forces: None

Also: 614 Pz, 653 JgPz, 669 Ost, 2SS Pz,
FBB, Fuh Gren, 10SS Pz, 11 Pz.

Allied: 4 Inf, 9 Arm at Larochette,
9 Arm Inf, 803 TD, 78/2 Rngr.

Special Forces: One available on 17th,
18th, or 19th.

Also: 70 Tnk, 4 Inf (17-1), 10 Arm Inf.

Allied: 106 Inf, 28 Inf, 9 Arm at
Weiswampach, 1107 Eng, 1128 Eng,
1A/526, 78/2 Rngr.

Allied Decisive: 6 or less VP
Estimated Playing Time: 3 Hours

Special Rules
Units may not move outside of the limits of
the designated playing area. German supply
source is zone C. Allied supply source is
zone P. At start units (28th Inf) in Vianden
and Diekirch are removed. Game ends at
the end of the December 18th turn. All
other normal rules in effect.

Victory Conditions
German Decisive: Germans control both
Luxembourg and Mersch
German Tactical: Germans control one
town and contest the other
Draw: Both towns contested

Also: 70 Tnk, 7 Arm, 4 Inf(17-1), 10 Arm,
82 Abn, 101 Abn, 705 TD, 740 Tnk,
2HHC, 1313 Eng, 84 Inf, 551 Inf, 29 Tnk.

Scenario: The First Three Days
Map Area
Entire map

Units
Special Rules
Units may not move outside the limits of the
designated playing area. Units that either
start or enter the game (as reinforcements)
outside these limits must end their first day
on the map in supply and within the
designated playing area or they are
eliminated. All units are in supply at set up.
All reinforcements are in supply when placed
in their entry zone. Otherwise, supply may
only be traced along roads and into or through
areas within the designated playing area.
German supply sources are zones B & C.

All units per the Campaign Game.

Special Rules
The scenario ends at the end of the Allied
December 18-3 impulse. All other normal
rules are in effect except for scoring.

Scoring
Usual victory point areas indicated on the
map do not score points. Exiting German
units through a VP multiplier zone scores

Allied Tactical: One town contested
Allied Decisive: Neither town contested
Both Sides Lose: One town controlled,
other not contested
Estimated Playing Time: Less than one hour.

Page 10

Rules Booklet

The Battle of the Bulge
VPs normally. German Special Forces
placement is restricted by the normal rules
and usual VP areas. VP areas specific to this
scenario have no effect on placement of the
German Special Forces unit. The Germans
score two points for each scenario victory
point town occupied solely by German forces.
One point is scored for each victory point
town contested. Scenario victory point towns
are Luxembourg, Arlon, Martelange,
Bastogne, Noville, Houffalize, Vielsalm,
Stavelot, Malmedy, Hoffrai, and Monschau.
In addition, the Germans score 3 points for
each undefended hole in the Allied lines
through which the German Player can trace
a road route to an exit zone between D and
K, inclusive, from one of his entry zones (A,
B or C). The points for this are determined
at the end of the Allied 18-3 impulse.

Examples of Play

Combat: Artillery Allocation

Movement
The German armor in Mersch could move
to Rambrouch via Ettelbruck and Eschdorf
in 5 movement points. However, if the
bridge between 58-59 was blown, it could
not reach Rambrouch since it would cost 9
MPs to reach there via the minor road
through Sauel. However, if any of the
infantry units moved before the armor,
then the armor would be able to reach
Rambrouch.

Rambrouch
65

Redange
Att

Eschdor

t

R.

Victory Conditions

63

er

The German has two 3 factor foot infantry
and one 2 factor armor in a battle. The
Allied player has 2 artillery units available.
Since there are 6 strength points of German
foot infantry and two of armor, the first
artillery must be against one of the infantry,
since they are the most common type in the
battle. To determine the target for the
second artillery, subtract the number of
previously targeted strength points from
the total infantry strength points. 6-3 = 3.
This accounts for the infantry shot at by
the first artillery unit. Compare this to the
number of armor points present 3 > 2.
Since there are still more infantry strength
points available as targets than armor
strength points, the second artillery shot
must be allocated to the other infantry
unit.

66

German Decisive: 13 or more VP

Grosbous
uel

64

German Tactical: 10-11-12 VP
Ettelbruck

Draw: 8-9 VP

Mersch

Allied Tactical: 6-7 VP
Allied Decisive: 5 or less VP

58

59

orf

Estimated Playing Time: 3 Hours

The Campaign Game
Map Area
Use the entire map.

In the situation below, the stack at Waimes
attempts to move to Malmedy. The US
Engineer attempts to blow the bridge and
is successful. The German Player may
then alter his move and head in another
direction. The German does not pay the
cost of entering Malmedy, since he could
not get there, but does pay a 1 MP penalty
for having the bridge blown up as he was
about to cross it.

Units
Set up units as indicated on the Campaign
Game Setup Cards.

Vielsalm
Francor
Champs
Recht

Victory Conditions

15-24

Allied Marginal

25-29

Draw

30-39

German Marginal

40+

German Decisive

Copyright © GMT Games, 1999

90
92

Malmedy

Ligneuville

91

Waimes
76

che R.

Allied Decisive

93

War

0-14

Assume that in a different battle there are
three German units as shown below. Since
foot infantry is the primary type, the first
artillery shot must go on one of the foot
infantry units. The Allied Player could
select either the 4 factor or the 3 factor as
the primary target. The 4 factor is targeted,
so the remaining foot value is 7-4 = 3.
Since 3 factors of foot infantry remain, and
this is equal to the number of mech factors,
the Allied player may choose to shoot at
either the mech unit or the remaining foot
unit with his 2nd artillery shot.

Hoffrai
77

Page 11

Tigers in The Mist

Combat

Supply

The German is attacking with 4 units, an
armor, a mech, and 2 foot infantry. The
Allied player is defending with an armor
and a mech unit. The mech unit is
entrenched. The attack is taking place
across a river, and all of the attackers just
crossed a bridge to reach the battle area.
The German Player, despite having 2
artillery calls, rolled a 9 and a 7, and therefore
does not have a combined arms force. The
US artillery has already fired and missed.

Illustrated below is a typical situation at the
beginning of a turn. The Allies have a
continuous line of units stretching across
the board from the north to the south edge.
In some of the Allied front line areas, there
are German units remaining from combat
which occurred on the previous turn.
Libramont
149

If the repair attempt is successful, on the
next turn, the German mech unit can move
up to 8 MP. Also, the armor unit could
cross the bridge on the next impulse and
attack the defenders in Marnach. (The
German mech has already attacked and
can not attack again that day). If the bridge
repair attempt is not successful, the German
mech could move only 5 MP on the
following turns unless it can trace a line of
supply across another unblown bridge.

Moircy
146

C

Neuf
Chateau
150

Nives
148

Wiltz

Lullange

98

97

Sprimont
147

Fauvilliers

.
Clerf R

107

Bastogne
109

Holzhum
69

Marnach

rtelange
100

Su
re R

The defender fires first, so the US Player
must shoot at the armor with his armor and
decides to shoot at the 2 factor foot infantry
with his mech unit. He is not required to
shoot at the German mech unit because it
is a one step unit. Normally, the armor
would hit on a 5 and the mech on a 4 on
defense, but the German is crossing a river
and does not have combined arms, so all
US shots get a -2 DRM. The armor unit
rolls 2 and 8 for one hit. The mech unit
rolls 3, 5, and 6 for 3 hits. The German
armor unit is reduced to a 1 and the two
factor foot infantry is destroyed. The extra
hit on the foot infantry is lost.

Sainlez

70

We

108

At the beginning of his first impulse, the
German Player may not move his infantry
unit from Bastogne to Spimont or his
armor from Nives to Moircy because he
does not have a line of supply into either of
those destination areas.
Say the German attacks during the first
impulse in Bastogne and eliminates the
defending armor there. He does not move
or attack with the armor in Nives. If in his
impulse the Allied Player does not move a
unit into Bastogne (combat required) or
Sprimont, at the beginning of the 2nd
impulse the German will have a line of
supply into Moircy via Bastogne and
Sprimont. His armor will then be free to
move from Nives into Moircy and beyond.

Dasburg
51

Lut

Gemund
55

If the mech unit is eliminated in the combat
above, the original bridge repair attempt
can not be made.
If the US counterattacks and eliminates
the mech unit before the bridge is repaired
(say the first repair attempt failed), then
the German engineer could not make
another repair attempt until another
German unit was present in Marnach after
combat during a German impulse. In this
case, accumulated bridge repair modifiers
would remain in place.

Bridge Repair

Now it is the Germans turn to shoot. The
armor must be allocated first, and is targeted
on the armor. The mech unit is next, and
must shoot at the mech unit. The foot
infantry could fire at either, but is targeted
on the armor since it has a better chance of
a hit. The armor will hit on DRs of 1-4.
The mech will hit on DRs of 1-2 against
the entrenched unit, and the foot will hit
the armor on a DR of 1-3.
Page 12

The German has moved a 3 factor mech
unit across the river from Dasburg to
Marnach. In order to do this, the mech
unit had to leave its vehicles behind and
wade across the river. It costs 3 MP to cross
a river at a blown bridge plus 1 MP to enter
Marnach because it is occupied. The
German armor can not cross at a blown
bridge. Combat in Marnach is then
resolved. If the German mech unit survives,
then the German engineer in Dasburg can
attempt to repair the blown bridge at the
end of the impulse.
Rules Booklet

The Battle of the Bulge

Designer’s Notes
Research
I did not use primary sources in the course
of my research for this game. My access to
such sources was extremely limited. My
primary design intent was to create a fun,
playable game that would be an interesting
challenge for relative novices as well as very
good players. Historical accuracy was a
secondary consideration and realism came
third. The objective was to create a game
that was a reasonable approximation of the
first week of the Battle of the Bulge.
My main sources for the feel of the battle
and historical information were Hugh Cole,
The Ardennes: Battle of the Bulge, Charles
MacDonald, A Time for Trumpets, (easily
the most readable and perhaps best account
of the battle), and SLA Marshall, Bastogne:
The First Eight Days. There were many
other books as noted in the bibliography,
but these 3 really were instrumental in
forming my impression of the nature of the
campaign. My Order of Battle information
was based on Avalon Hills “Battle of the
Bulge, 1981”, 3Ws “Hitler’s Last Gamble”,
Danny Parkers OB in the appendices to
MacDonald’s book above, and an article by
Parker in the Avalon Hill GENERAL,
Vol. 23, #3, entitled “Kampfgruppe Peiper”.
By use of a spreadsheet and considerable
experimentation, I was able to develop a
counter mix and strength point system that
seemed reasonable. Initially I started with
a relatively recent road map of the area.
After getting out to California, I discovered
some excellent map sources in the UC
Berkeley Library. The final map was
developed using several topographic maps
of the battlefield area which covered the
period 1928-1964.
In the course of my reading on the Bulge,
three things struck me as highly significant
about the battle. First, the highly
compartmentalized nature of the terrain
resulted in many small battles being fought
in relative isolation from each other. The
second factor is that the Germans didn’t do
as well as they could have, given the paper
strength of the opposing forces available.
This was probably due to poor low level
training on the German troops part as well
as huge differences in morale between the
two sides. Finally, the contribution of their
artillery to the American victory was
Copyright © GMT Games, 1999

immense, whereas German artillery
effectiveness was poor at best, and nearly
non-existent in many instances. In my
opinion Bastogne could never have been
held if the artillery situation had been
reversed.

Design Decisions
The Board: The point to point movement
system made sense from the standpoint
that the battle was really a series of
disconnected skirmishes over towns and
important crossroads. The German’s
options for bypassing pockets of resistance
were limited. Time and again, relatively
small scratch forces were able to hold up
powerful kampfgruppes simply by fighting
tenaciously in well chosen positions. The
attackers were successful mainly when they
found holes in the defensive line which
they exploited, or when they were able to
maneuver around strong points and force
the defenders to retreat or be surrounded.
Point to point is definitely more limiting to
maneuver than a hex system. Without
hexes, terrain effects were diminished in
importance. Purists may complain about
the lack of fortresses at Liege, Namur, and
Clervaux. I decided they were unnecessary
chrome. Clervaux isn’t even on the map.
Marnach was the critical crossroads that
was heavily fought over most of the day on
December 16th. Aachen, Luxembourg, and
Arlon are natural north-south boundaries
for the campaign. Aachen was given a
victory point value because it was the only
major German city in Allied hands at the
time. Its recapture would be a propaganda
coup. It also controls important roads
leading toward Antwerp. Luxembourg and
Arlon are part of a critical road net located
just south of the historical limits of the
battle. They were given VP values to make
the Americans fight for them and to force
the Germans to garrison them if/when
they capture those cities.
A lot of simplification occurred during
development. At one time I had more road
types and briefly considered some terrain
features. All that got pitched in the interest
of producing a clean system. The decision
to convert the board to an “area” look was
made in the interest of giving a better feel
for the terrain to the players. Without the
woods, towns, etc., it just didn’t feel like
you were campaigning in the Ardennes.

The Counters: The counters conform to
no standard military designation.
Originally this was a regimental game like
most Bulge games, but that meant that the
game would have many more counters than
I preferred, like maybe 500-600. Now there
are 352, including information counters.
Instead of regimental size counters, each
division has an overall strength and rough
composition which relates to their historical
makeup and character.
Morale and training have been taken into
consideration, but not to the extent that it
probably affected the situation in real life. It
is up to the German player to provide better
leadership than did his real life counterparts.
For example, the 2nd Infantry Division
comprises 4 counters totaling 12 strength
points. The 99th infantry is only 2 counters
totaling 6 SPs. This is because the 2nd
Division troops were hardened veterans who
had picked up a lot of extra weaponry from
past battlefields and had considerable AFV
forces attached. The 99th was green and
didn’t possess weapons in excess of its official
TO&E, nor did it have attached AFVs, it’s
TD units being all towed guns.
Armor counters include tanks, tank
destroyers, and assault guns. Mechanized
counters include armored infantry,
panzergrenadiers, motorized flak, etc.
Motorized and foot infantry are obvious
categories. Towed anti tank guns and
infantry support weapons, etc. were factored
into the infantry units. Engineers seemed
critical to bridge construction and
demolition. Not a whole lot of this went on
during the battle, but what did was almost
exclusively performed by engineer units
attached to Corps or Armies and often was
of critical importance.
Artillery: One of the key decisions in the
game was to eliminate artillery counters in
the traditional sense. The assumption is
that artillery support was possible for any
unit that had a radio, therefore were
counters really needed? The idea is that
you call up the local artillery controller and
if the guns are not busy or displacing, they
will fire off a few rounds in support of your
position or attack. The more important
(read bigger) the battle, the better chance
you have for support.
Naturally the Americans have a big
advantage here, due to superior
communications, greater mobility of their
Page 13

Tigers in The Mist
artillery, and being on the defensive. The
players will quickly discover that US artillery
on defense is a very potent force. On the
other hand, the German player will be
happy if he can get his gunners on the
radio, while an actual hit on a target should
be regarded as an unexpected bonus. After
much experimentation and adjustment, the
probabilities feel about right for the system
chosen, although realistically the power of
US artillery is probably quite understated
in the game. One very interesting thing
about the artillery rules is that artillery
support is not guaranteed. This represents
loss of observers, need to displace at an
untimely moment, busy elsewhere, lack of
ammo, or a communication failure.
Movement: I am extremely proud of the
movement system. It is difficult to appreciate
just how good it is until you play 3 or 4 turns
as the Germans. You will feel very frustrated
at trying to mount efficient attacks. Nothing
can seem to quite get where it’s needed. The
two types of roads, and the extra MP to
enter an occupied area mesh beautifully
with the 5 and 8 MPs of all the units.
Note that a motorized unit can get from
Luxembourg to Transinne in one move on
a clear road (that’s half way across the
board), but the same unit can only move
two areas on a minor road that has units in
every area along the movement path. There
were more types of roads and different
movement factors at various times during
the development process. The present
system is cleaner and plays much better
than earlier tries.
Combat: The Bulge was very much a battle
of attrition, thus a step reduction system
seemed in order. The Germans often took
heavy casualties in their initial assaults, so
the defender fires first and hits take effect
rule also seemed appropriate. The battles
tend to be very bloody, and somewhat
dicey. Again, I was trying to avoid the “sure
thing” attack. A single factor can survive a
hit by a 10 factor stack. It’s not likely, but
the possibility is there. The uncertainty
this produces tends to keep both players on
the edge of their seats. You never know
whether your troops will be heros, buffoons,
or just average joes until the dice are rolled.
In dense terrain, such as the Ardennes, the
defender has a big advantage because the
attacker cannot easily maneuver around
defensive positions. Thus units on defense
are rewarded with higher to hit numbers.
Page 14

Bridge Demolition and Construction:
Having introduced random factors and the
idea of there are no guarantees in the game,
it only seemed natural to apply the same
principle to both bridge demolition and
construction. Off the top of my head, I
recall 3 instances of successful demolition
(Trois Ponts twice and Werbomont) and
two failures (Stavelot and Ourtheville). So
bridge demolition was not a sure thing.
Chrome: I’m one of those guys who really
hates chrome for chrome’s sake. I have Black
SS units, otherwise they are the same as any
other German. Ditto for the British. The
Special Forces counter was a suggestion of a
playtest group.I added some refinements to
make it a sort of limited use joker in the deck.
Had the German supply people been fully
informed that this was to be a major offensive,
the Germans would have had plenty of gas
for the 6 days the game covers, so I decided
to forego fuel shortages and fuel dumps.
Air power had a fairly negligible effect
during the first 6 days. Entrenchments
were clearly important historically, so they
are in the game. Combined Arms I really
wanted to factor in because it is one of the
basic premises of warfare through the ages.
Thus I have the 3 standard arms of every
modern army: armor, infantry, and artillery.
I penalized only the attacker because it seemed
to me that not having artillery support or
tanks did not necessarily mean your attack
was less effective at causing casualties, but the
defender had less reason to keep his head
down. Therefore he would be better able to
shoot up the attackers. Weather also seemed
unnecessary given the thrust of the system
although again purists may not appreciate its
omission. A simple supply system is almost
always needed in games of this scale. I tried to
keep it to a minimum.
The Impulse System: I always liked the idea
that each side should have to hold back
reserves. Indeed this is one of the sacred cows
of military theory and practice. The attacker
needs reserves to exploit success. The defender
needs them to seal off the penetrations. At
one point I had 4 impulses per turn with
night rules. It didn’t work. Three impulses
with no special night rules works very nicely.
The German loves to use leapfrog tactics to
keep the offensive moving forward, but the
extra MP to enter occupied areas add up very
quickly and creates nice congestion problems.

Stacking: The dual stacking system was
developed because I wanted to accomplish
two things which I couldn’t seem to do
with a single limiter:
1. Control the strength that the Germans
could put into any one attack.
2. Make the effects of attrition on the ability to attack more pronounced, thus further justifying the step reduction system.
Unit Quality and Target Priority: These
very artificial rules were put in for one
reason; if I didn’t have them, the US would
only shoot at German armor and engineers,
and never at volksgrenadiers (foot infantry).
That is hardly realistic. This isn’t a perfect
solution, but it does work. I eased the
impact of this rule a bit by not requiring
defending units to fire at one factor
attackers, otherwise some annoying sneaky
tactics were possible.

Summary
My intent was to create a Bulge game that
would be easy to learn and fun to play. I also
wanted it to be enough of a challenge that
serious players could enjoy it as well. The
kind of games I enjoy most have clean,
straightforward rules systems and are low
in complexity, but rich in play possibilities.
I want to spend my precious gaming time
strategizing, not looking up some obscure
rule. The counter quantity had to be
manageable, and I wanted the game to be
decided at the Meuse River. The Germans
are definitely more capable than they were
in reality, but otherwise the game would
not be as interesting, at least to me. Finally,
I decided early on that I couldn’t deal with
the entire campaign. It was just too big,
and I think that it is really difficult to
design a balanced game where the tide
turns completely. I didn’t want those
headaches. After nearly ten years of effort,
it seems to be just about right.
Ray Freeman

Rules Booklet

The Battle of the Bulge

Play Strategy
The Germans have to attack constantly,
but not rashly. Getting into a slugging
match with the US is a slow, expensive
proposition. It’s risky to attack stacks of 6
SPs or more unless the area is critical to
your chances (for example: Bastogne,
Malmedy, or Arlon), or you need attrition
badly, even unfavorable attrition. Always
attack weak positions, simply to kill off
American units. If possible, flank strong
positions to force a withdrawal or to pocket
the defenders and place them out of supply.
A much more difficult decision is whether
to attack a strong US position within reach
of a big stack or two, or to position those
stacks for use against critical areas the
following turn. If the German can’t crack
the Allied line open at least once in a game,
he will likely lose. Keep in mind that you
must have units with which to attack each
impulse of a turn. Advancing only one or
two areas each day will leave you short of
the Meuse. Don’t forget to hold back units
to exploit with on the 2nd and 3rd impulse.
At first, the Germans seem to have
unlimited resources. Not at all true! Soon
enough they will have problems keeping
the pressure on the US. As the German,
you definitely need those reserve panzer
divisions as early as possible, so push hard
for the release objectives.

Bibliography
Books and Articles
MacDonald, Charles B., A Time for Trumpets:
The Untold Story of the Battle of the Bulge,
William Morrow & Co., Inc., New York, NY,
1985.
Cole, Hugh M., The Ardennes: Battle of the
Bulge, Center of Military History, United States
Army, Washington, DC, 1965.

The problem for the Americans is just to
survive the first crisis which occurs between
16-2 and 18-1. Be stingy with your defensive
resources until the 3rd impulse of a turn. At
first it will seem that you can’t stop the
German player from doing as he pleases,
particularly once the panzers get going and
your initial front line disintegrates. Then
suddenly, on the 18th, you think, “Wow, I
survived, and I’ve got all these units to play
with now!” Don’t kid yourself. A second
crisis is coming between the 19-2 and 20-1
impulses, and it is very easy to throw away a
virtually won position with an ill-considered
move on the 19th.
It is generally unwise to over commit yourself
early in a turn. Leaving even a single hole in
the line at the end of a day can be fatal. For
the Americans, possibly the most important
weapon in their arsenal is the shovel. Dig in
wherever possible, but be careful that you
can’t be outflanked and isolated by
committing yourself too early in a turn.
Tactically it is a good idea to shoot up the big
German units. The Germans must have at
least one 3 SP unit available to make a 9
factor attack force, and obviously four one
factor units are not much of a threat yet still
jam up the roads.
For both players, keeping one’s morale up can
be difficult. This is the sort of game where just
when you think you’ve won (or lost), suddenly
one turn later the entire picture can look very
Dupuy, Trevor N., Hitler’s Last Gamble: The
Battle of the Bulge, December 1944-January
1945, Harper-Collins Publishers, New York,
NY, 1994.
Astor, Gerald, A Blood-Dimmed Tide: The
Battle of the Bulge by the Men who Fought It,
Dell Publishing, New York, NY, 1992.
Elstob, Peter, Hitler’s Last Offensive, The
Macmillan Company, New York, NY, 1971.

different. It is entirely possible to give up
hope too early. I have played and observed
games where the Germans were making
very little progress, but seemed to be having
good battle results. Still, they might have
only scored one or two VP in the first three
turns. Suddenly, on the 20th or 21st, the US
line goes to pieces, and the Germans score
50 points on the 22nd. By the same token I
have seen games where the Germans could
do no wrong for the first three days (Bastogne
falls on the 17th!) and yet on the 22nd, the
game comes down to one last battle over a
VP town.
Players often find that they have a very
difficult time telling who is winning unless
the game is very one-sided. The moral of
this is that you shouldn’t get too discouraged
or too cocky. Overall, the system is simple,
but requires a high level of skill and
psychological toughness.
I wanted to design a game that would be
decided at the Meuse River. If the Germans
can get across the Meuse with some reasonable
force, they should win. If not, they lose unless
they own the rest of the board. That’s the sort
of victory conditions I was trying to set up.
The point ranges for levels of victory seem
about right based on playtesting. If you find
that they skew the results too much after both
players have some experience, then feel free
to modify them.

Carte de Belgique, 1:250,000, Cartes Tarides,
Paris, France, 1928.
Karte von Belgien, 1:100,000, Generalstab des
Heeres, Sonderausgabe, Berlin, Germany, 1940.

Games
Sinagaglio, Bruno, The Battle of the Bulge,
The Avalon Hill Game Company, Baltimore,
MD, 1981.

Parker, Danny S., Kampfgruppe Peiper:
Towards a More Realistic Battle of the Bulge,
in The General, vol. 23, #3, pp. 37-44.

Parker, Danny S., Hitler’s Last Gamble, 3W,
Cambria, CA, 1989.

Maps

Personal Communications

Marshall, S.L.A., Bastogne, The First Eight
Days, Center of Military History, United States
Army, Washington, DC, reprinted 1988.

Belgium-Luxembourg, 1:250,000, Hallwag,
A.G., Bern, Switzerland, 1991.

Randy Heller, Danny Parker

Eisenhower, John, S.D., The Bitter Woods, G.
P. Putnam’s Sons, New York, NY, 1969.

Belgie, 1:250,000, Institut Geographique
Militaire, Uitgave 2, Bruxelles, Belgie, 1968.

MacDonald, Charles B., Company
Commander: Ballantine Books, New York,
NY, 1961.

Copyright © GMT Games, 1999

Page 15

Tigers in The Mist

Credits
Game Design: Ray Freeman
Game Development: Bill Alderman,
Garry Haggerty
Cover Art/Art Director:
Rodger B. MacGowan
Map and Counter Art: Mark Simonitch
Rules and Cards Editing/Layout:
Gene Billingsley
Playtesting: Ed Drukman, Larry
Davidson, Andrew Maly, Mike Nagel,
Tim Keenon, Mike Welker

PO Box 1308
Hanford, CA 93232
(800) 523-6111
(559) 583-1236
(559) 582-7775 (fax)
www.gmtgames.com
Page 16

Rules Booklet

