R U L E S O F P L AY
A

G

A

M

E

B

Y

C

H

R

I

S

T

I

A

N

T .

P

E

T

E

R

S

E

N

To J.R.R. Tolkien, for endless inspiration and the courage to dream of new worlds
To George Lucas, for he once understood the star in our mind’s eye
To Frank Herbert, for bringing intrigue and spice to the stars
To Gene Roddenberry, for his continuing mission
To Isaac Asimov, for showing us to look in, so that we may look out
To Dad, for the quest of knowledge, and for the games
To Gretchen, for her love
To Lars, forever
- CTP

My name is Mahthom Iq Seerva.
I am the Winnaran keeper of the Custodian Chronicle, and I write this from the
ancient Tower of Annals in old Mecatol City. Since inheriting the duties of the
chronicle from my father, I have enjoyed the view of our city from my wide windows; enjoyed the old buildings, ancient towers, and bright lights that proudly
stretch into the remote distance. Yet, like the shadow at my feet, I can never escape
or forget the lethal finite borders of my city. I cannot cast aside the fact that less
than a hundred leagues from this tower, our city shields rise to protect us from the
poisonous dust that is the Sea of Desolation. The terrible wasteland that covers our
planet.
My people, the Winnarans, have kept this city safe for more than three thousand
years. Ever since the time of the great scourge, we have been the custodians of the
imperial throne, the imperial records, and the galactic council here on Mecatol Rex.
We have indeed been faithful to the promise that we made to the last emperor.
My hands tremble as I write this. Events are now unfolding which I believe to be
the harbinger of great change. I foresee that, in my lifetime, our custodianship will
come to an end. This is why I have contacted you. I will here seek to give you a
brief, but true, summary of the recent history of our galaxy. I give this to you,
because I know that you will spread this knowledge far and wide. As we enter the
dangerous years before us, I fear that the galaxy shall have a great need of the past.
It is told that the Lazax emperors arose from the ashes of the Mahact kings. Little is
known of their early ascension, but it is impossible to deny that the Lazax must
have been a profoundly intelligent, benevolent, and wise people. After their prehistoric rise to power, we know that they chose the central planet of Mecatol Rex as
their home world. The year that the Lazax first arrived on Mecatol Rex is recorded
in the Imperial Chronicle as "first" and marks the beginning of my account.
For untold ages, the Lazax ruled the known galaxy. As new races came into contact
with the empire, they would be allowed to join the Galactic Council that represented
the needs and voices of the empires people. The great races: Xxcha, Hacan, Letnev,
Hylar, Sol, and N'orr were all represented in the council during the last time of the
Lazax empire.
Yet, as the years passed, discoveries of new races and planetary systems began to
slow. Little by little the mood of the empire changed as technological and intellectual growth began to diminish. In their need for advancement, the great races began
instead to look to the power of the Lazax and the resources of their neighbors.
Greed and ambition slowly grew in the hearts of statesmen and councilors. The
spirit of the empire turned suspicious and fearful. It is during this time that the first
conflicts between the great races are recorded in the Imperial Chronicle. The
Galactic Council became a seedbed of intrigue, ushering in an era of spies and
assassins. First in secret, and later in public, the great races began at this time to
build their military capabilities. Many started territorial expansions that extended
beyond their original charter. Border strife and resource disputes began to proliferate, gnawing at the very foundations of the empire. This was a time of growing
darkness that is now known as the Age of Dusk.
Throughout most of this age, the Lazax held authority without question. Except for
a few minor and unsuccessful rebellions, few dared to openly challenge the emperors. Yet, blinded by assurance of eternal rule, the Lazax did not perceive the threat
of ambition that grew around them. As years passed, tensions between the great
races grew deeper, and so did their hunger for power. In the end, they held only one
thing in common: They hated the Lazax, hated the imperial rule, and hated the
benevolent arrogance of the emperors.

In protest over imperial trade oversight, the Baron of Letnev had begun a blockade
of trade traffic through the Quann wormhole. As this had been far from the first
trouble with the Letnev, an unconcerned Lazax emperor sought to solve the conflict
peacefully in the Galactic Council.
Then, without warning, the blockading Letnev ships were attacked and annihilated
by a Sol task force acting without imperial mandate. Losing valuable trade-income,
the Sol federation had lost patience, and had acted in its own interest.
Angered, the emperor attempted to consolidate his control by issuing the Maandu
edict, which would place all warships under direct imperial supervision. The
Maandu edict would be the stone that shattered a brittle empire. After this proclamation, the Letnev, Sol, and Jol-Nar civilizations announced their immediate withdrawal from the council, drawing the galaxy into civil war.
The Quann conflict marks the beginning of the Age of Twilight.
As race fought race, as a thousand territorial disputes erupted over a few years, the
Lazax desperately sought to assert their authority. Holding together a crumbling
empire, Lazax fleets fought across the galaxy. The final days of the Lazax began in
the seventy-third year of the war. Without warning, an alliance of Sol, N'orr, and
Hacan attacked Mecatol Rex itself.
Of all the planets in the galaxy, no planet was more war-torn than Mecatol Rex.
Over the course of only a few years, the planet’s ecology was ravaged by bombardments, its population decimated, and its green fields blasted into a toxic wasteland.
The last Lazax emperor and his entire family were executed during an early Sol
incursion and no successor was named.
After the death of the last emperor, all semblance of Lazax control collapsed. The
Lazax people became hunted across the galaxy in the vengeful wave of murder that
is known as the great scourge. Lasting only twenty years, the scourge resulted in the
complete annihilation of the Lazax race. Until now, no Lazax had been seen in the
known galaxy for more than 3000 years.
The Twilight Wars continued for centuries. Yet no race was powerful enough to
seize the throne and risk the fate of the Lazax. Slowly the strength of the great civilizations failed as their economies crumbled and whole technologies were lost from
the strain of long war.
The Twilight Wars died in a slow whisper. The time that followed, now known as
the Dark Years, was a period of economic, cultural, and intellectual collapse. The
great races had by then retreated into their own small, safe areas of space.
With time, the Dark Years did come to an end, and a calm but uncertain period of
rebuilding began. As I write this, the great races have regained elements of their
former strength. In my city, the Galactic Council is growing in influence once
more, while the great races are embarking on the colonization of neighboring systems, abandoned during the Dark Years.
The signs of great change are everywhere. I taste it in the air I breathe. This year,
as if walking out of ancient prophecy, the Lazax returned from the darkness of history in a foreboding cybernetic form. To me, their coming is like the first wind of a
terrible storm. I feel as if the galaxy is waking. As if an ancient beast stirs from
slumber in a dark cave.
The day will soon come when a new empire will rise. For the sake of all, may the
new emperor not only have the power to seize the throne, but the strength to conquer the peace.

A small affair near the Quann wormhole was the spark that set the galaxy aflame.
If not, I fear that a sea of desolation will drown us all.

Welcome
Welcome to a galaxy of epic conquest, interstellar
trade, and political intrigue. TWILIGHT IMPERIUM
is an exciting board game in which 3-6 players seek
to build a galactic empire by the cunning use of strategy, diplomacy, and resource management. By taking
on the role of a great interstellar race, players will
seek the ultimate goal: to claim the Imperial Throne
on Mecatol Rex and lead the galaxy to a new age of
glory.
But the road to the Imperial Throne is long and the
galaxy holds many dangers. Do you have what it
takes to lead your race out of the troubled Twilight
Age? Do you have the determination to move your
race forward using a balance of diplomacy, careful
planning, and the use of force? Are you ready to
direct the scientific development, military might, and
economic growth for an entire interstellar civilization?
If so, your time has come!

The Object of
the Game
To win a game of TWILIGHT IMPERIUM ("TI"),
players seek to accumulate a total of 10 victory points
by achieving objectives and carefully choosing helpful strategies. The game ends when one player gains
his 10th victory point or immediately after any other
game-ending condition applies (see later).

Game Contents and
Preparation
Enclosed in your TI box, you will find the following
components.
• Six frames of highly detailed plastic components
in six colors. Each frame contains the following:
- 5 Dreadnoughts
- 4 Carriers
- 8 Cruisers
- 8 Destroyers
- 2 War Suns
- 12 Ground Forces
- 10 Fighters
- 6 Planetary Defense Systems (PDS)
- 3 Space Docks

• 144 Technology Cards (24 each in six decks separated by color)
• 51 Planet Cards
• 103 Action Cards
• 60 Political Cards
• 30 Objective Cards (Secret and Public)
• 20 Trade Cards (2 each for 10 races)
• 10 Race Sheets
• 30 Leader Counters
• 8 Cardboard Strategy Cards
• 160 Command Counters (16 each for 10 races)
• 150 Control Markers (15 each for 10 races)
• 8 Bonus Counters
• 40 Trade Goods Counters
• 23 Fighter Supplement Counters
• 23 Ground Force Supplement Counters
• 1 Speaker Token
• 1 Victory Point Track
• 43 Hexagonal Board Tiles
• This rules booklet
• 4 10-sided dice (note that in TI, the "0" result
represents the number "10")
• 44 Domain Counters
Before you play your first game of TWILIGHT
IMPERIUM, carefully detach the plastic components
from their frames and separate all cards into individual deck types. Carefully punch out the cardboard
pieces so that they do not tear. Be sure to keep all
components out of the reach of small children and
animals.

Component
Overview

from which the great races hail. Systems containing
an interior red outline are Special Systems (such as
Asteroid Fields) governed by special rules.

The Plastic Game Units
The detailed plastic pieces of TI (collectively called
"units") represent the military personnel, shipyards,
defense systems, and spaceships that players will
command. Units not employed on the game board are
kept in a player’s reinforcement area.

The Planet Cards
Representing the multitude of planets in TI, Planet
Cards are used by players to indicate ownership over
each individual planet and are "exhausted" (turned
face down) when their owner "spends" the planets'
resources or influence.

We will here summarize the various components of
TI, so that you may recognize them while reading
these rules.

The Technology Cards

The Map Hexes
Before every game of TI, players will create a unique
game board by connecting the provided hexagon map
pieces. Each individual piece is called a "system." The
systems of TI each represent an area of space, its
planets, and/or other elements of interest. Systems that
contain an interior yellow outline are Home Systems

Page 4

At the beginning of the game, each player receives an
identical Technology Deck (separated by color) consisting of 24 technology advances. Throughout the
game, when a player purchases (or otherwise
acquires) a technology, the corresponding Technology
Card is taken from his deck and placed face-up before
him.

The Action Cards
The Action Cards of TI provide players with a variety
of helpful events, maneuvers, bonuses, and other
advantages. Players receive Action Cards throughout
the game by a variety of activities.

Command Counters

The Trade Cards
Each race has two Trade Contract cards which they
can use to form trade agreements with other players.
Each Trade Card has a numerical trade value which
varies from race to race.

The Political Cards
Often the representatives of the great races must meet
in the hallowed halls of the Galactic Council on
Mecatol Rex to debate, deliberate, and enact policy
for the custodial imperial charter. When a player executes the primary ability of the Political Strategy Card
during the Action Phase (see later), he must draw and
resolve the top card of the Political Deck. Each
Political Card contains an agenda that all players
must vote upon. The effects of an agenda can range
from a minor formality, to a major change in the very
structure of the game.

The Objective Cards (Public and Secret)
In order to win TI, players need to accumulate 10 victory points. The primary way for players to receive
such is by qualifying for the requirements of an
Objective Card. The victory points provided by Public
Objective Cards are attainable by all players, whereas
those from Secret Objective Cards are individual to
each player.

The Command Counter in TI is the abstract but integral resource representing the domestic mandate,
budget, organization, logistics, and preparedness of
your race. When a player receives a Command
Counter from his reinforcements, he must place it in
either the Fleet Supply area, Strategy Allocation area,
or Command Pool area on his Race Sheet. In order to
execute tactical actions (such as moving, building, or
initiating combat on the board), take advantage of the
secondary abilities of Strategy Cards, or manage his
fleets, a player must wisely allocate and spend
Command Counters.

The Strategy Cards
Each of the eight cardboard Strategy Cards represents
a powerful short-term strategy. During the Strategy
Phase of each game round, each player will select one
Strategy Card and must later use its primary ability.
Each Strategy Card also enables an important secondary ability that other players may execute after the primary ability is resolved.

The Control Markers
At the beginning of the game, each player is provided
with a generous number of flag-shaped Control
Markers, each bearing the insignia of that player's
race. The Control Markers are used to represent a race
wherever appropriate, such as on the Victory Point
Track, on successfully achieved Objective Cards, and
(most often) to indicate ownership of planets.

The Bonus Counters
After all players have selected a Strategy Card during
the Strategy Phase, there will (in a six-player game)
be two Strategy Cards remaining in the common play
area. Before the Strategy Phase ends, the two remaining Strategy Cards both receive a Bonus Counter that
is placed on top of the Strategy Card itself. A player
that later selects such a Strategy Card will be able to
use the Bonus Counter to receive an additional
Command Counter or Trade Good.

Page 5

The Trade Good Counters
These counters represent the wealth and rewards of
interstellar commerce. They are primarily obtained by
active trade agreements while the Trade Strategy Card
is being executed. A player's Trade Goods can be used
as a direct substitute for either resources or influence,
and are frequently used as currency among players to
pay for bribes or other considerations.

provides each player with specific information for his
race as well as helpful game information tables. The
Race Sheet is also used for keeping track of a player’s
active Command Counters and Trade Goods.

Number of Players

The Victory Point Track
The Victory Point Track is used to indicate each player's accumulation of victory points. Note that the main
side of the Victory Point Track has spaces numbered
from 0 to 10, whereas the reverse side is numbered 0
to 14. The reverse side is be used with the optional
rule “The Long War” found on page 32.

These rules are written assuming that you will be
playing TI with 6 players. TI plays just as well with
fewer players, and rules for playing with 3-5 players
are provided on page 31 of this rules set.

Game Setup
Before you start playing, follow the steps below:

The Speaker (First Player) Token
This token is claimed each round by the player who
selects the Initiative Strategy Card during the Strategy
Phase. The player who controls the Speaker Token
always chooses the first Strategy Card during the next
Strategy Phase.

1

Separate the 10 Home Systems from the
other hexagonal gameboard pieces. Randomize the
Home Systems face down and allow every player to
draw one at random. This process determines which
race a player will control throughout the game. All
players then take the Race Sheet, Control Markers,
Trade Cards, and Command Counters corresponding
to their race.

2

Ground Force and Fighter Unit
Supplement Tokens
The Ground Force and the Fighter units are the only
units in the game that players may purchase unlimited
quantities of. All other unit types are limited to the
figures provided with the game. The Fighter and
Ground Force supplement tokens represent the extra
Fighter and Ground Force units that players may add
to their forces.

Enclosed in your game, you will find 10 large cardboard sheets, each representing one of the great races
of the TI universe. After selecting a race to play, each
player receives the corresponding Race Sheet, which

Place all the Trade Goods Counters in a single pile (the "Trade Supply") in the common play
area.

6

Now place the 8 Strategy Cards side-byside in numerical order with their "active" side up,
prominently in the common play area.

7

Create the Objective Deck, by following
the directions in the "Preparing the Objective Cards"
sidebar. Do not forget to place the unused Secret and
Public Objective Cards back in the box, while allowing no players to look at them.

8

Now place the Victory Point Track in the
common play area and place one Control Marker for
each player in the space marked "0."

9

Players must now create the game board (or
“galaxy”). Please read and carry out the instructions
for doing so in the "Setting up the Galaxy" sidebar on
page 8 before proceeding.

Each player selects one of the six available
colors and takes the plastic units and Technology
Deck corresponding to that color.

3

Find an area of the table that is convenient
for all players to reach. Designate this space the
"common play area." Then shuffle the Action Card
deck and the Political Card deck and place them separately in the common play area. Also place the Fighter
and Ground Force Supplement Counters in the common play area.

4

The Race Sheets

5

Each player takes the individual Planet
Cards corresponding to the planets of his Home
System and places these face up in his play area.
Place the remaining Planet Cards, representing the
neutral planets at the start of the game, in the common
play area.

Page 6

REINFORCEMENTS
Every player maintains a “reinforcement” area
consisting of his unused plastic units and
Command Counters. Whenever a player builds a
unit, it is taken from his available reinforcements
and thereafter placed on the board. (An exception
to this is the Fighter and Ground Force
Supplement counter, see later). Whenever a player
receives a new Command Counter, it is taken
from his available reinforcements and placed in
one of the three appropriate boxes on his Race
Sheet (Command Pool, Fleet Supply, or Strategy
Allocation).

10

After the galaxy has been created, all
players place their "setup units" (as indicated by their
Race Sheets) on their Home Systems. If a Home
System contains several planets, any Space Dock,
Ground Forces, and PDS may be placed among them
according to the player’s wishes. All players then find
and place their "Starting Technology" cards face up in
their respective play areas.

11

All players now take their starting
Command Counters from their reinforcements, placing them on their Race Sheets as follows: 2 Command Counters in the Strategy Allocation area, 3
Command Counters in the Command Pool area, and
3 Command Counters in the Fleet Supply area (with
the "Fleet" side up).
You are now ready to start the game.

The Game Round
After you have finished setting up the game, players
will begin playing the game by starting with the
Strategy Phase of the first game round.

Preparing the Objective Cards
Before the game begins, the Secret Objective
Cards must be distributed and the Public
Objective Deck properly prepared.

should now have 4 randomized Stage II Public
Objective Cards, one of which is the “Game
Over” card. Place these 4 cards face down in a
stack in the common play area. Place the
remaining Stage II cards back in the box, allowing no player to look at them.

First separate all the Objective Cards into the
three different types: Secret Objectives, Public
“Stage I” Objectives, and Public “Stage II”
Objectives. Then proceed to the following:
1) Shuffle the 10 Secret Objective Cards and
deal a random card face down to every player.
All players should read their Secret Objective
Card and then place the card face down in their
play area. A player is never allowed, for whatever reason, to show an opponent his Secret
Objective Card. Place the remaining Secret
Objective Cards back in the box, allowing no
player to look at them.
2) Now take the 10 Stage II Public Objective
Cards and remove the “Game Over” card.
Shuffle the remaining 9 Stage II cards and draw
3 random cards (at all times keeping them hidden from all players). After drawing the 3 random cards, take the “Game Over” card and shuffle it with the 3 randomly chosen cards. You

3) Then shuffle the 10 Stage I Public Objective
Cards and draw 6 random cards. Place the 6
cards on top of the 4 Stage II cards, now forming a single deck of 10 Public Objective Cards
in the common play area. This deck always consists of 6 random “Stage I” cards on top of 4
random “Stage II” cards (one of which is the
“Game Over” card). This deck is the “Public
Objective Deck.”
NOTE: It is important that the unused
Objective Cards (Secret, Public Stage I & II)
are placed back in the box so they remain
hidden from players both before and during
the game. Otherwise, experienced players
would be able to deduce which objectives are
in play before they are revealed.

TWILIGHT IMPERIUM is played over a consecutive
number of game rounds with each round consisting of
the following phases:
1) The Strategy Phase
2) The Action Phase
3) The Status Phase
After every Status Phase, if no player has yet declared
victory, simply begin another game round starting
with another Strategy Phase, etc. In this way the game
continues, repeating the three phases above, until a
player has achieved 10 victory points or until another
game-ending condition is met.
Victory points are generally claimed during the Status
Phase as players fulfill the requirements printed on the
Public and Secret Objective Cards. In order to meet
these various objectives, players must seek to expand
their empires, forge alliances with other races, negotiate for the best outcome during the Galactic Council,
and choose the optimal Strategy Cards during the
Strategy Phase.

THE STRATEGY PHASE

A STRATEGY

may choose from. These are: Warfare, Political, Trade,
Initiative, Imperial, Logistics, Diplomacy, or
Technology.
Not only does the Strategy Card provide an important
ability, but it also determines the order of play (as
indicated by its number; see the the sidebar on page
11 for more information on the order of play).

CARD

During every Strategy Phase, each player must choose
one available Strategy Card from the common play
area (The chosen Strategy Card grants its player a
special ability during the upcoming Action Phase.) At
the beginning of every Strategy Phase, there are 8
possible Strategy Cards (or "strategies") that players
Page 7

At the beginning of every Strategy Phase, the player
who controls the Speaker Token (the "Speaker") may
choose the first Strategy Card from the common play
area. When selecting a Strategy Card, a player simply
chooses and takes an available Strategy Card from the
common play area and places it before him (with the
"active" side facing up). That card is now no longer
available for selection by the other players. After the
Speaker has picked his Strategy Card, the other players, in clockwise order from the Speaker, each select
one of the remaining Strategy Cards. In this way

Creating the Galaxy

TI uses a unique game board consisting of multiple
hexagon pieces (“systems”) that are brought
together in a unique combination at the beginning
of every game. Before a game of TI begins, players
build the galaxy by following these steps:
1) After all players have drawn their Home
Systems, find the Mecatol Rex system and place it
in the middle of the table. Then randomly determine one player to be “first player.“ Give the
“Speaker“ Token to the first player. He then shuffles the remaining 32 systems, randomly removes
two systems (by placing them back in the box without looking at them), and deals five systems, face
down, to every player. Players may look at their
dealt systems but should not show them to the
other players.
2) The first player now selects one of the sides of
Mecatol Rex, and drags his Home System about
two feet towards himself in a straight line away
from the chosen side (see diagram). Then the player to his left does the same, etc., until all players
have chosen a side and placed their Home Systems
on the table (note that the sixth player must chose
the last remaining side of Mecatol Rex). Players
should now shift their seating around the table to
best accommodate their Home System placement.

3) Then players, in clockwise order, starting with
the first player, begin creating the galaxy by placing, one at a time, a single system face up adjacent
to the Mecatol Rex system. After the first ring
around Mecatol is completed, players continue to
place systems in the second ring until that is completed, and then finally proceed to the third ring.
When all the systems are placed, the galaxy is
finally created.
The following rules apply to placing systems:
• A system cannot be placed in the second ring
before the first ring surrounding Mecatol Rex has
been completed. Likewise, a tile cannot be placed
in the third ring before the second ring is completed (see diagram).
• As soon as the correct placement for your Home
System becomes available, connect your Home
System to the galaxy at its fixed spot (which is
exactly 3 systems out from the chosen side of
Mecatol Rex, see diagram). Connecting your Home
System is automatic and does not cost you a placement “turn.”
• You may not place a Special System (with an
inner red border) adjacent to another Special
System, unless you have no other option.

Page 8

• The order of placement switches counterclockwise after all players have placed a round of tiles,
and yet again clockwise after that, etc. This in
effect will make the player who placed the last system, place the first system in the next round (thus
actually placing two systems in a row). Example of
turn order: P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6, P6, P5, P4, P3,
P2, P1, P1, P2…
• If you placed a system that did not contain a planet during your last placement, you must, if able,
place a system that does contain a planet during
your next placement. If you are unable to do so,
you must reveal your remaining systems to the
other players to prove this. Then place one of your
available systems.
When creating the board, the actual shape of the
galaxy and the position of Home Systems will differ depending on the number of players. If you are
playing a game with less than six players, please
consult the optional rules on page 31 of this rules
booklet.

every player will pick an available Strategy Card
before the Action Phase begins. Note that being farther clockwise from the Speaker gives a player an
increasingly limited choice of Strategy Cards (i.e., the
player to the immediate right of the Speaker will only
have three cards to choose from).
After all players have selected a Strategy Card, there
will be two cards remaining in the common play area.
The Speaker places a Bonus Counter on the two
remaining unchosen Strategy Cards.

Suggested Player Area
Available Trade
Contracts and active Trade
Agreements
Active
Technology Advances

Available/Exhausted Planet cards

A BONUS COUNTER

Reinforcements Area

Trade Goods

In this way, should a Strategy Card not be picked for
several consecutive rounds, multiple Bonus Counters
will accumulate on it. The presence of Bonus
Counters makes a Strategy Card more attractive in
subsequent rounds. When a player selects a Strategy
Card that contains one or more Bonus Counters, that
player may immediately exchange each Bonus
Counter for either a Trade Good or a Command
Counter (either of which is immediately placed on the
player's Race Sheet).

Technology
Deck

Race Sheet
Control
Markers

Secret Objective Card
(kept hidden)

After all players have chosen their Strategy Cards and
the Bonus Counters have been placed on the remaining cards, the Strategy Phase ends and the game proceeds to the Action Phase.
Note that the last player to claim the Speaker Token
will keep the Speaker Token until another player
selects the Initiative card during a future Strategy
Phase.

THE ACTION PHASE
The Action Phase forms the heart of TI. It is during
the Action Phase that players will execute the special
abilities of their Strategy Cards, produce new units at
their Space Docks, conquer new planets, and move
their fleets into battle. The Action Phase is resolved
over a number of player turns in which each player
may take a single action. Each player turn is taken in
the order of play (see sidebar on the next page), with
players one after the other taking one action to complete their turn. After the last player in the order of
play has taken his turn, play returns once more to the
first player in the order of play who may take an
action, followed by the second player, and so on. In
this way, players keep taking one action at a time, fol-

Active Command
Counters

Action Cards
(kept hidden)

Available Units

Available Command
Counters

lowing the order of play, until all players have passed
and the Action Phase ends.

The Strategic Action

A player that is currently in the process of taking his
turn (i.e., action) is called the active player.

A player must, at some point during the Action Phase,
execute a Strategic Action (except for the player holding the Initiative Strategy Card, who has no Strategic
Action). When a player chooses to take his Strategic
Action, he first reads and then resolves the Primary
Ability as printed on his Strategy Card.

The Player Action
When it is a player's turn to take an action, he must
execute one of the following:
1) Strategic Action
2) Tactical Action
3) Transfer Action
4) Pass
These actions are described in detail throughout the
yellow sections below.

Page 9

After the active player has finished resolving the
Primary Ability, the other players, in clockwise order
from the active player, may each spend one
Command Counter from their Strategy Allocation area
on their Race sheet to execute the Secondary Ability
of the current Strategy Card.

The process of taking a Tactical Action always follows the "Activation Sequence" below:

Suggested Common Play Area
Bonus Tokens

Political Card
Deck

Action Card
Deck

Objective Card
Deck

Trade Supply
Victory Point Track

Fighter/Ground Force
Supplement Tokens

Revealed Objective Cards
Active Laws
Neutral Planet cards

Strategy Cards (presented before a Strategy Phase)

Special Exception: Players do not have to spend a
Command Counter from their Strategy Allocation
area when executing the Secondary Ability of the
Logistics Strategy Card.

A player may only take one Strategic Action per
round. Likewise, a player may only execute any given
Secondary Ability once (but a player may, if he has a
sufficient number of Command Counters in his
Strategy Allocation area, participate in the Secondary
Ability of several Strategy Cards).

Except for the first step (the activation itself), each
individual step of the Activation Sequence is only
resolved if the condition for its resolution applies or is
initiated by the active player. A player, for example,
may activate a system to produce new units there during step 7, but does not necessarily have to move any
ships into the system during step 2. Or, a player may
activate a system and move ships into the system, but
if the system contains no enemy ships, there is no
Space Battle during step 4, etc.
On the other hand, step 2 through 7 cannot be executed unless preceded by the initial activation. If a player
has no Command Counters left in his Command Pool,
he cannot take a Tactical action, and therefore not
move ships, fight battles, produce units, etc.

ing the Logistics Strategy, even if the Logistics
Strategy has a lower initiative number.
Details for each s pecific Strategy Card can be found
on pages 36-38.

The active player may never execute the Secondary
Ability of his own Strategy Card.
After all players have completed (or passed on) the
Secondary Ability, the active player's Strategy Card is
flipped over onto its "Inactive" side and the player
action is over.

THE ACTIVATION SEQUENCE
1) Activate a system
2) Move ships into the system
3) PDS fire
4) Space Battle
5) Planetary Landings
6) Invasion Combat
7) Produce Units

The Tactical Action
The Tactical Action is the primary function for
engagement on the game board. It is during a Tactical
Actions that you will move your fleets on the board,
engage in space battles, transport your Ground Forces
to new planets, build new units, etc.

“Friendly“ and
“Enemy“
When the cards and rules of TI refer to a
“friendly” unit or planet, it refers to a unit or
planet belonging to you (i.e., a single player).
Although you may have an alliance or be personally friendly with another player, for the purposes of TI rules, only your own units and planets are “friendly.“
When the rules refer to an “enemy” planet or
unit, it refers to any unit or planet not controlled
by you (i.e., controlled by any other player).
Even though you may have an alliance with
another player, and even though you may consider the other players your personal friends, for
the purposes of TI rules, the units and planets of
other players are considered “enemy.”

The initiative number on each Strategy Card only
determines the order of play. Players may execute
their Strategic Action at a time of their choosing,
regardless of its initiative number. It is likely, for
example, that the player holding the Trade Strategy
will take his Strategic Action before the player holdPage 10

THE ACTIVATION SEQUENCE
DETAIL

IN

Below, each step in the Activation Sequence is
described in detail. Rules for how to resolve Space
Battles and Invasion Combat can be found on
pages 15 through 18 .

1) ACTIVATE A SYSTEM
Take an available Command Counter from your
Command Pool and use it to activate a system by
placing the Command Counter directly on a system
(place the counter face up so that your race's insignia
is showing).
You cannot activate a system if one of your Command
Counters has already been placed in the system (by a
prior activation or by other means). You can, however, activate a system that contains one (or more)
Command Counters belonging to other races (you
may ignore their presence).

Sheet. A movement of "1" indicates that a
ship can move from its current system
into an adjacent system. A movement of
2 indicates that the ship may move up to
two systems from its current system, etc.
• A Carrier/War Sun may pick up Ground
Force and PDS units at any stage during the
movement step (before, during, and even in
the activated system itself). Ground Force and
PDS units aboard a Carrier, however, cannot be
"dropped off" by the Carrier until the Planetary
Landing step of the Activation Sequence. If the last
Ground Force unit on a planet is picked up by a
Carrier, the owner of the planet must place a
Control Marker on the planet to indicate that he
controls it.
• A ship is never allowed to move through a system
occupied by enemy ships (except Fighters). The only
way to enter a system that contains enemy ships is to
activate that system itself.

A system that contains a player's Command Counter
is considered to have been activated by that player.
In summary: When the TI rules and cards refer to an
"activated" system, this means a system that contains
a Command Counter of the player in question. As a
general rule, for purposes of activation and movement, a player can ignore the presence of Command
Counters on the board belonging to other players.
This means, for example, that every race can activate
a specific system. In such a case, that system would
contain a Command Counter from each race and
would be considered “activated” by all players.
Although the Command Counters on the board
belonging to other players do not limit where you may
activate a system, it can be helpful to study which
systems an opponent has activated, since those systems cannot be activated again by that player this
round, nor can his ships in his activated systems
move.

2) MOVE SHIPS INTO SYSTEM
After you have activated a system, you may move
friendly ships (within movement range) into the activated system. Only movement into the activated
system is allowed.
The rules for moving ships during a Tactical Action
are as follows:
• Every ship (except for Fighter units, which move
with Carriers or War Suns) has a movement value
found on the unit table located on every player's Race

ORDER

OF

PLAY

Each Strategy Card has an Initiative Number
printed near its top. This number represents
what place in the order of play its owner will
be. Thus, the player who has the Initiative
Strategy card is always first, followed by the
player who controls the Diplomacy Strategy
card, etc.
The order of play, as dictated by the Strategy
Cards, is as follows:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Initiative Strategy
Diplomacy Strategy
Political Strategy
Logistics Strategy
Trade Strategy
Warfare Strategy
Technology Strategy
Imperial Strategy

When the turn order advances to an unchosen
Strategy Card in the common play area, simply
skip it and proceed to the next number. If, for
example, no player picked the Initiative
Strategy card during the Strategy Phase, the
first player in the turn order would be the player who selected the Diplomacy Strategy.

Page 11

• A ship may not move if it is located in a system
that already has been activated by the active player
(i.e., contains a friendly Command Counter placed
prior to the current activation). It therefore follows
that once a ship has moved into an activated system,
the very Command Counter used for the activation
will prevent the ship from moving again during the
same round. Ships are allowed to move through systems containing friendly Command Counters.
Certain effects by Strategy or Action Cards can
remove Command Counters from the board, allowing
systems to be activated again by the same player (and
allowing any friendly units in such a system to move
again, etc).
In summary: Only ships that can actually enter the
activated system may move. Ships that are out of
movement range, that need to pass through a system
containing enemy units, or are in a system already
activated, may not move. Remember, any ship moving
must always end its movement in the system that was
just activated. See the detailed graphical example of a
Tactical activation and movement on page 13.

3) PDS FIRE
After the active player has finished moving his ships
into the activated system, enemy PDS in range may
fire at the active player's fleet. For every "hit," the
activating player must remove a casualty from the
fleet (note that Dreadnoughts and War Suns can take
one "Damage" before they are destroyed, see page
30).
After enemy PDS units have fired, any PDS in range
owned by the active player may then fire at enemy
ships in the activated system. For more details on
PDS units, see page 29.

Definition of a Fleet
For the purposes of the TI rules and cards, a fleet
is defined as all spaceships (Fighters, Cruisers,
Carriers, Dreadnoughts, Destroyers, and War Sun
units) controlled by one player in one system at
any given time.

4) SPACE BATTLES
First determine whether a Space Battle will occur in
the activated system.
If the active player has moved one or more ships into
a system that contains ships controlled by an opponent
(even a Fighter) a Space Battle must be initiated
between the two players. A Space Battle will continue
until only one player has ships remaining in the system.
If a Space Battle is initiated, the active player is the
attacker, and the player whose ships were in the system before activation is the defender.
For complete rules of how to resolve a Space Battle,
please see the “Space Battles” section on page 15.

5) PLANETARY LANDINGS
After any Space Battles are completed, the active
player may now commence Planetary
Landings by landing Ground Force
and PDS units from his Carriers
onto planets in the activated system.
If a system contains multiple
planets, the active player may
split any landing forces between
them in any way he sees fit, but
may not change his mind once
the Invasion Combat step
begins.
There are three types of
Planetary Landings.
Friendly Landing: A
player lands units on a
planet already under his
control. Simply add the
new units to the ones
already there, if any.

Neutral Landing: A player lands units on a neutral
planet (i.e., a planet controlled by no other player).
After landing at least one Ground Force unit on the
neutral planet, the active player takes the corresponding Planet Card from the Planet Deck and places it
exhausted in his play area.
Note that only a Ground Force unit can take over a
planet. If a PDS unit lands alone on a neutral or
enemy planet, it is immediately destroyed.
Hostile Landing (also called an "Invasion"): A
player lands units on a planet containing one or more
of an enemy player’s Ground Force units. This will
result in an Invasion Combat during the Invasion
Combat step.
If a player lands units on a planet that is controlled by
an opponent, but does not contain any enemy Ground
Forces, the planet falls without resistance. The invader
simply removes the opponent’s Control Marker and
takes the corresponding Planet Card from the opponent, placing it exhausted into his play area.

6) INVASION COMBAT
After planetary landings, should any planet contain
Ground Forces of two different players, that planet
must now engage in Invasion Combat. If a system has
several planets engaged in Invasion Combat, the battles are resolved one-at-a-time in the order decided by
the active player.
Landing PDS units with an Invasion
The invading player is allowed to land PDS units with
his Ground Forces during the Planetary Landings step.
Such PDS units do not participate in Invasion
Combat, nor can they be taken as a combat casualty.
If the last invading Ground Force unit is destroyed
during Invasion Combat, all invading PDS are immediately destroyed with no further effect.
Details for how to resolve Invasion Combat are found
in the “Invasion Combat” section on page 17.

6) PRODUCE UNITS
As the final step of a Tactical Action, the active player
may produce new units at one or more friendly Space
Docks in the activated system.
During this step, it is also possible for the active player to produce a new Space Dock unit on an eligible
planet in the activated system (provided that the planet has been under the player’s control for the entire
round).

Page 12

See more information on how to produce units under
the Space Dock on page 26.

Concluding a Tactical Action
After resolving the steps of the Activation Sequence
(Activate a system, Movement, PDS fire, Space
Battles, Planetary Landings, Invasion Combat, and
Production), the Tactical Action is over and the opportunity to take an action proceeds to the next player in
the order of play.

The Transfer Action
The Transfer Action is a simple reorganization of
units that cannot be effectively handled by the Tactical
Action. The Transfer Action simultaneously activates
two adjacent systems that only contain units
belonging to the active player and allows units in
either system to simultaneously move between the
two systems. In addition to this movement, the active
player may also produce units in one of the two systems if a Space Dock is present in either.
The process of taking a Transfer Action always follows the steps of the Transfer Sequence:

THE TRANSFER SEQUENCE
1) Activate two systems
2) Movement between systems
3) PDS Fire
4) Planetary Landings
5) Production (in one system)
Below, each step of the Transfer Sequence is
described in detail:

1) ACTIVATE TWO SYSTEMS
After announcing a Transfer Action, the active player
takes one Command Counter from his Command Pool
and activates a system by placing the Command
Counter upon it. Then the active player takes a
Command Counter from his reinforcements and activates another system adjacent to the one just activated. Both activated systems must contain at least one
unit controlled by the active player and must contain
absolutely no enemy units (including Ground Forces
and PDS).
REMINDER: When "activating a system" the active
player places a Command Counter physically on the
system itself (with his race insignia facing up). It is
never possible for a player to activate a system that is
already activated (i.e., already contains one of his
Command Counters).

Example of Activation and Movement

In the example above, the N’orr player has just initiated
a Tactical Action during the Action Phase. As the first
step, he takes a Command Counter from his Command
Pool and places it on the system occupied by the Xxcha
fleet and planet.

3

This fleet of one Destroyer, one Carrier
and four Fighters are all within movement range, and
may all move into the activated system. If he wishes, the
N’orr player may split the fleet and only move some of the
ships (although the Fighters should stay with the Carrier).

After activating the system, he proceeds to the second step in the
Activation Sequence. As the N’orr player may now move ships into the
activated system, his movement options are as follows:

4

These two Destroyers are within movement range of the activated
system, but their system was already activated earlier by the N’orr player.
This prevents them from moving to the activated system.

1

The Dreadnought has a movement rate of 1. Since the activated
system is 2 spaces away, it is too far preventing the Dreadnought from
moving into the activated system.
2

5

Although these two Cruisers are in two different systems, they
each have a movement rate of “2,” which allows them to reach the activated system. The two Cruisers may move into the activated system. The
top Cruiser will move through a system that contains another N’orr
Command Counter, which is perfectly legal.

This N’orr Cruiser is within movement range to reach the activated
system, but it cannot move through the Supernova or through the system
containing two Xxcha Destroyers. This prevents the Cruiser from moving
to the activated system.
After moving units into the activated system (being careful not to exceed
his Fleet Supply) the N’orr player will engage in Space Battle against the
Xxcha fleet there.

Page 13

2) MOVEMENT
The active player may now move friendly ships
between the two activated systems. As during a
Tactical Action, Fighters, PDS, and Ground Force
units must be transported by Carrier/War Sun.
3) PDS FIRE
After the active player has finished moving, enemy
PDS in range may fire at the active player's fleets in
the activated systems. PDS units that are in range of
both activated systems may fire at only one of the systems, not both.
4) PLANETARY LANDINGS
During this step, any Ground Force and PDS units
onboard Carriers in the activated systems may land on
friendly planets in their system. Note that during a
Transfer Action you may only land forces on friendly
systems, not neutral planets or planets containing an
enemy Control Marker.
5) PRODUCTION
The active player may now produce units at his Space
Docks in one of the activated systems (but not both).

Passing
If a player does not wish to take any additional
actions, he may choose to pass. A player is only
allowed to pass if he has already taken his Strategic
Action (except for the player who controls the
Initiative Strategy, who has no Strategic Action). All
players must therefore, at some point during the
Action Phase, take their Strategic Action (and thereby
allow other players to execute the Secondary Ability
of their Strategy Card).
After a player has passed, he is no longer allowed to
take any additional actions this round. When it normally would have been his turn in the order of play,
simply skip him, and proceed to the next player.
Exception: A player who has passed, is allowed to
execute the Secondary Ability of Strategy Cards
that are resolved later during the phase.

Example: After taking several actions, including his
Strategic Action, the Xxcha player decides to pass.
After doing so, the game goes on for several additional cycles until the Letnev player decides to take his
Strategic Action. After the Letnev has resolved the
Primary Ability of the Strategy Card, the other players, including the Xxcha, are allowed to execute its
Secondary Ability.

END

OF THE

ACTION PHASE

The Action Phase continues, repeating the order of
play, until all players have passed. This could potentially result in a remaining player taking several consecutive actions, while all other players, having
passed, must wait for him to finish his actions.
Once all players have passed, the game proceeds to
the Status Phase.

THE STATUS PHASE
The Status Phase, when compared to either the
Strategy or Action Phase, is a straightforward experience. It is during the Status Phase that many of the
game functions are "reset," such as players refreshing
Planet Cards, discarding Command Counters from the
board, etc. It is also during the Status Phase that players may gain victory points by meeting the requirements of a Public and/or Secret Objective Card.
To resolve the Status Phase, follow the Status
Sequence below:
The Status Sequence
1) Qualify for Public/Secret Objective Cards
2) Repair Damaged Ships
3) Remove Command Counters
4) Refresh Planet Cards
5) Receive 1 Action Card and 2 Command
Counters
6) Redistribute Command Areas
7) Return Strategy Cards
The Status Sequence steps are described here in
detail:

The “Imperium Rex“
Objective Card
While the Primary Ability of the Imperial
Strategy card is resolved, it is possible that the
“Imperium Rex” objective card is drawn from
the Objective Deck. When this card is drawn,
the game ends immediately and a winner is
declared The winner is the player who has the
most victory points (the active player does not
receive the 2 victory points). If there is a tie,
then the greater number of resolved Objective
Cards breaks the tie; if there is still a tie, then
the greater number of planets, then unused
Command Counters, and then the total number
of Command Counters on a player's Race
Sheet. If still tied, then the game ends in a
draw between the tying players.

doing so, the player places one of his Control Markers
on the claimed Objective Card (indicating that he has
claimed that objective), and then advances his
Control Marker on the Victory Point Track the appropriate number of spaces.
Once a player has received Victory Points for a specific Objective Card, he may not qualify for that
Objective Card again.
In addition, if a player has met the requirements of his
Secret Objective Card, he may now reveal the card,
prove that its objectives are met, and then claim its
victory points.
Important Exception: A player may never qualify
for a Public or Secret Objective Card if he does not
control all the planets in his Home System.

Winning the Game

1) QUALIFY FOR PUBLIC/SECRET OBJECTIVES
In the order of play, each player may announce that he
has met the requirements of one face-up Public
Objective Card and/or his Secret Objective Card.

When a player advances his Control Marker to the
10th step of the Victory Point Track, he has gained the
power needed to claim the Imperial Throne on
Mecatol Rex. The Winnaran Custodians will step
aside for their new emperor, who must lead the galaxy
to a new age of prosperity and peace.

After a player announces that he has met the objectives of a face up Public Objective Card, he must
prove to his opponents that his claim is valid. After

As players, one at a time, qualify for Objective Cards
by following the order of play, one player will always
reach 10 victory points first. That player is the winner

Page 14

of the game, even if other players would also have
achieved 10 or more victory points later in the order
of play.
It is also possible for a player to win the game during
this step if he is the first to meet the requirements of
either the “Supremacy” or “Domination” card (provided that either card is face up in the common play
area).

2) REPAIR DAMAGED SHIPS
All damaged Dreadnought and War Sun units are
returned to their normal upright position on the game
board. They are no longer considered to be damaged.
3) REMOVE COMMAND COUNTERS
Each player now removes all his Command Counters
from the game board, placing them in his reinforcements pile.
4) REFRESH PLANET CARDS
Each player refreshes his exhausted Planet Cards by
turning them face up.
5) PLAYERS RECEIVE 1 ACTION CARD AND 2
COMMAND COUNTERS
Each player now receives one Action Card from the
Action Card deck and two Command Counters from
his reinforcements (placing each Command Counter
in either of the three appropriate areas of his Race
Sheet).

Space Battles
If the active system contains ships belonging to the
active player and ships belonging to an opponent, a
Space Battle must be fought.
A Space Battle is fought over a consecutive number of
combat rounds until only ships of one player remain
(or the ships of both players have been simultaneously
destroyed).
Before Combat
Before the actual Space Battle begins, resolve any
pre-combat actions such as Destroyer Anti-Fighter
Barrage and then Sabotage Runs (the Sabotage
Run is an optional rule found on page 35).
Destroyer Anti-Fighter Barrage
Before the first round of Space Battle, roll two dice
for each Destroyer unit in the battle. For every result
equal to or higher than the Destroyer's combat value
(all combat values can be found on the unit table on
every player's Race Sheet), the opponent must take
one Fighter unit as an immediate casualty. Such eliminated Fighter units are removed immediately and
placed back among a player's reinforcements; they do
not receive return fire and will not participate in the
upcoming Space Battle.

6) REDISTRIBUTE COMMAND AREAS
Each player (in order of play, if necessary) may now
redistribute the Command Counters between the
Strategy Allocation, Command Pool, and Fleet Supply
areas on his Race Sheet. If a player reduces the number of Command Counters in his Fleet Supply,
remember to check that all of his fleets on the board
are in compliance with his new fleet size limit.

The Battle Round

7) RETURN STRATEGY CARDS
Each player now returns his Strategy Card to the common play area. Here the eight Strategy Cards will be
ready for the beginning of the next game round.

The Space Battle Sequence
1)
Announce withdrawals/retreats
2)
Roll combat dice
3)
Remove casualties
4)
Execute withdrawals/retreats

END

OF A

ROUND

After the Status Phase has been completed (and provided no winner has yet emerged), the game round is
over and another game round begins with a new
Strategy Phase. In this way, the game is played over a
series of game rounds until a winner has been determined.

A fleet containing no Fighter units is unaffected by
pre-combat Destroyer fire.

After finishing any "before combat" actions, continue
to the actual combat. A Space Battle always follows
the Space Battle Sequence:

After step 4, if both players still have ships remaining
in the system, repeat the Space Battle Sequence until
only one player has ships remaining, or all ships in
the system have been destroyed.
Below, each step of the Space Battle Sequence is
described in detail:

1. ANNOUNCE RETREATS/WITHDRAWALS
The attacker first has the option to announce his withdrawal from battle. If the attacker chooses not to
declare a withdrawal, then the defender may declare a
Page 15

retreat. Note that if the attacker does decide to withdraw, the defender may not declare a retreat.
Any actual withdrawals/retreats occur at the last step
of the combat phase. This means that all Space Battles
will have at least one round of combat.

2. ROLL COMBAT DICE
During this step, both players simultaneously roll one
combat die for every one of their spaceships in the
battle (with the exception of the War Sun, which rolls
three dice). For each result that is equal to or higher
than the combat value of its ship, a "hit" is scored (all
base combat values can be found on the unit table on
a player’s Race Sheet). Players must remember the
total number of successful hits as they move to the
next step.
Example: The attacking player has a fleet of three
Cruisers and one Dreadnought. During the first battle
round, he rolls for his attacking ships. He takes three
dice for the Cruisers (Combat Value 7) and rolls a 2,
5, and 7 -- one hit. Then he takes one die for his
Dreadnought and rolls a 6 -- a hit. The attacking
player announces that he has inflicted a total of two
hits on the defending fleet. The defending player has
two Fighters (supported by a Space Dock in the system) and one Destroyer. He takes two dice for the
Fighter units and rolls a 3 and a 5 -- both misses.
Then he takes one die for his Destroyer and rolls a 0
(a 10) a hit. The defending player announces that he
has inflicted one total hit on the attacking fleet.

Space Battle Example

1

2

3

In this example, the Xxcha player has just activated a N’orr system, moving a fleet of one
Carrier unit (carrying two Ground Forces),
three Fighter units (also supported by the
Carrier) and one Cruiser unit.

The Xxcha player now rolls combat dice for
his units. His Fighters roll a 3, 5, and a 10 (one
hit), his Carrier a 6 (a miss), and finally his
Cruiser an 8 (one hit). The Xxcha player
announces that he has made 2 successful hits.

The second round of Space Battle combat now
begins. The Xxcha player declares that he will
not withdraw, and the N’orr that he will not
retreat.

As the N’orr has two Destroyer units in the
battle, and the Xxcha has Fighter units, the
N’orr Destroyers each will roll two dice for
their pre-combat “Destroyer Anti-Fighter
Barrage.” The results are 2, 2, 5, and 6 (all
misses). The players then proceed to the first
step of the Space Battle Sequence. The Xxcha
player announces that he will not withdraw,
and the N’orr player announces that he does
not wish to retreat.

Then the N’orr player rolls three combat dice
for his spaceships. The N’orr Cruiser rolls a 8
(a hit) and the two Destroyer units roll a 9 and
a 10 (both hits). The N’orr player announces
that he has made 3 successful hits.

3. REMOVE CASUALTIES
Each player must now take a number of casualties
equal to the number of hits scored by the opponent in
step 2.
First the attacking player removes his casualties. For
every casualty, he must destroy one of his ships of his
choice or damage one of his Dreadnoughts or War
Suns (if a damaged Dreadnought or War Sun receives
a second hit, it is destroyed). Destroyed ships are
placed among a player's reinforcements, and become
available for production once again. After the attacking player has removed all his casualties, the defending player must then remove his casualties.

As casualties, the Xxcha player elects to
destroy three Fighter units. The N’orr player
removes his two Destroyer units.

Note that whenever a player removes casualties in TI,
the casualty is always determined by the affected
player. Since Fighters are the cheapest unit to produce, they make effective "cannon fodder" and are
thus typically among the first units to be chosen as
casualties.
Example: The defending player scored one hit. The
attacking player then chooses to damage his
Dreadnought (soaking up a casualty). The attacker
scored a total of two hits. The defending player chooses to remove two Fighter units as casualties and
places them back with his reinforcements.

Page 16

The Xxcha player then proceeds to roll a 9
with his Cruiser (hit), and 1 with his Carrier (a
miss). The N’orr player rolls a 3 with his
Cruiser (a miss). As he must sustain one casualty, the N’orr player must destroy his remaining Cruiser, and the Space Battle is now over
with the Xxcha player victorious.
During the Planetary Landings step of the
Activation Sequence, the Xxcha plans to land
the two Ground Forces on the N’orr planet,
starting an Invasion Combat.

4. Execute Withdrawals/Retreats
If the attacking player announced a withdrawal or the
defending player announced a retreat during step 1 of
the Space Battle Sequence, that player may now execute the withdrawal/retreat, following the rules below.
• A withdrawal or retreat is not allowed if, at this
point in the battle, the opposing player has no units
left in the system. Even if a player announced a withdrawal or retreat at the beginning of the combat
round, if he has somehow managed to destroy all the
opposing units, the withdrawal/retreat is cancelled and
the units must remain in the system.

• When executing a withdrawal or retreat, a player
must withdraw his entire fleet to an adjacent system
that has previously been activated by the withdrawing/retreating player. If a player has no previously activated systems adjacent to the contested system, he may not withdraw or retreat.
After a successful withdrawal or retreat, make sure
that the withdrawing/retreating player is still in compliance with his Fleet Supply (see rules for Fleet
Supply on page 21) and has sufficient Fighter capacity
(see the Fighter units description on page 29) in the
new system. If not, he must immediately destroy the
excess ships.

END OF A SPACE BATTLE
After the first Space Battle round is completed, if both
players still have surviving ships in the system, another Space Battle round begins. This continues until
only one player has ships in the system (or the ships
of both players have been eliminated).

Invasion Combat
After the active player has landed one or more
Ground Force units during the Planetary Landings
step of a Tactical Action, an Invasion Combat must be
fought if the destination planet holds any enemy
Ground Force units.
Invasion Combat is executed almost identically to
Space Battle, with the notable exception that no withdrawals or retreats are allowed.

BEFORE COMBAT
Before the actual Invasion Combat begins, players
must resolve pre-combat actions such as planetary
bombardments and defensive PDS fire.

Receiving Planet
Cards
Whenever a player receives a Planet Card, by
either successfully taking over a neutral planet or
by successfully invading an enemy planet, he
claims the corresponding Planet Card and places
it exhausted in his play area. A newly claimed
Planet Card is always received exhausted, even if
the previous owner had not yet exhausted it.

Bombardments
Dreadnought and War Sun units in the activated system may bombard a planet before the player undertakes Invasion Combat (exception: a War Sun unit
may bombard a planet even if no Invasion Combat is
about to take place). Simply roll one combat die for
every Dreadnought, three for every War Sun, and
remove one enemy Ground Force on the contested
planet for every result equal to or higher than the
combat value of the bombarding unit.
Remember that a Dreadnought may not bombard a
planet that contains at least one enemy PDS due to the
presence of a planetary shield.
Ground Forces destroyed by bombardment are
removed immediately, do not receive return fire, and
will not participate in the upcoming Invasion Combat.
PDS Fire
After the attacking player has finished his bombardment, the defending player may fire a single shot with
each PDS unit on the contested planet. The defending
player rolls a die for every PDS unit present, and for
every result equal to or greater than the combat value
of the PDS unit, an invading Ground Force is
destroyed. Attacking Ground Force units destroyed by
defending PDS do not receive return fire and will not
participate in the upcoming Invasion Combat.

THE INVASION COMBAT ROUND
After any bombardment and defensive PDS fire has
been resolved, the players proceed to the Invasion
Combat itself. Like a Space Battle, Invasion Combat
is fought over a series of consecutive combat rounds
until only one player's Ground Forces (or none)
remain.

The Races of
TWILIGHT IMPERIUM
Universities
of Jol Nar
The Naalu
Collective
The L1z1x
Mindnet
The Mentak
Coalition

The Barony
of Letnev

The Xxcha
Kingdom

The Yssaril
Tribes

To resolve an Invasion Combat round, follow the
Invasion Combat Sequence:
The Invasion Combat Sequence
1)
Roll combat dice
2)
Casualties are removed
The sequence is here described in detail:
1) Roll Combat Dice
Both players simultaneously roll one die for every
friendly Ground Force unit on the planet. For every
result equal to or higher than the combat value of the
Ground Force unit, the player scores a "hit." Players
must remember their total number of successful hits
as they move to the next step.
2) Remove Casualties
Each player must now take a number of Ground Force
Page 17

The Emirates
of Hacan

The Sardakk
N’orr

The Federation
of Sol

unit casualties equal to the number of hits scored by
the opponent in step 1. Casualties are, as always,
returned to a player's reinforcement pile.
If, at this point, both players still have Ground Force
units remaining on the planet, another Invasion
Combat round is initiated. This continues until only
one (or no) player has Ground Force units left on the
planet.

Other Game
Concepts and Rules
THE SYSTEMS
There are three types of systems in TWILIGHT
IMPERIUM:

Invasion Success?
If all defending Ground Forces were destroyed and at
least one attacking Ground Force survived the battle,
the invasion is a success. All defending PDS units and
any Space Dock on the planet are immediately
destroyed. The attacking player then claims the Planet
Card from the previous owner and places it, exhausted, into his play area.
Since combat is simultaneous, it is possible that all
the Ground Forces on both sides were destroyed. If
this is the case, the defending player retains control
over the planet and simply places one of his Control
Markers on the vacant planet to indicate this.

NEBULA
A Nebula is governed by the following rules:

Home Systems (Interior Yellow Border)

• A Fleet defending a Nebula receives +1 to its combat rolls during any Space Battle here
• Ships can never move through a Nebula (but ships
can move into a Nebula via normal activation)
• A ship leaving a Nebula always has its movement
reduced to 1 (regardless of technology modifiers and
Action Cards).

These represent the starting systems for each of the 10
great races. At the beginning of the game, players randomly draw one of these systems to determine which
race they will play.

Special Systems (Interior Red Border)
The Special Systems represent three unique types of
interstellar terrain, governed by the following rules:

SUPERNOVA
These fiery dying stars are incredibly dangerous and
absolutely impassible. A Supernova may never be
activated.

ASTEROID FIELD
A player's ships may not move through an Asteroid
Field unless that player has gained the Anti-mass
Deflector (Red) technology. If a player does have the
required technology, he may move his ships through
an Asteroid Field, but it is never possible, by any
means, for a ship to end its movement in an
Asteroid Field. An Asteroid Field may never be activated.

Page 18

REGULAR SYSTEMS
Regular systems are either empty, or contain one to
two planets (see the "Planets of Twilight Imperium"
sidebar for more information). Some regular systems
also contain an end of either the Alpha or Beta
Wormhole. The large majority of the TI galaxy consists of regular systems, and they form the battlegrounds and points of contention for the great races.

Although considered a regular system, the Mecatol
Rex system always forms the center of the galaxy and
is never randomly distributed to players before the
galaxy is created.

Scuttling units
At any time during the Status Phase, players are
allowed to scuttle (destroy) any of their own units on
the board. Scuttled units are simply returned to the
player’s reinforcement pile and become available for
production during the next Action Phase.

The Planets of
TWILIGHT IMPERIUM

THE FIGHTER AND GROUND FORCE
SUPPLEMENT COUNTERS

Planet
Name

WORMHOLES
In TI, Wormholes are spatial anomalies that connect
distant areas of space. A system containing one end of
a Wormhole is considered adjacent (even for the purposes of a transfer action) to a system containing
another end of its Wormhole type (Alpha or Beta).
For example, a ship with a movement rate of 1 may
move from a system containing a Beta Wormhole,
directly to another system containing a Beta
Wormhole (remember that all movement is still part
of an Activation Sequence in which ships must end
their movement in the activated system).
If only one Wormhole of a type is in play, it has no
function and is ignored.

UNIT LIMITATIONS
Except for Fighters and Ground Forces, players are
limited to the number of units provided in the game.
If all of a player’s units of a specific type are on the
board, that player may not produce additional units of
that kind until one is destroyed and returned to the
player's reinforcement pile.
Example: A player has been using all of his 5
Dreadnought units in his campaign against the
Letnev. Last round, he was unable to build another
Dreadnought unit, since all 5 of his Dreadnought
units were in play. During a Space Battle this round,
however, the player loses a Dreadnought. The
destroyed Dreadnought is placed back with his reinforcements, allowing the player to build the
Dreadnought unit again (provided that he has the
resources to pay for it and a Command Counter in his
Command Pool to activate a system containing a
Space Dock).

Unlike every other unit type, players are allowed to
build more Fighter and Ground Force units than supplied with the game. To build these additional units,
players must use the Fighter or Ground Force
Supplement Counters. These counters are neutral, can
be used by any player, and are governed by the following rules:
The presence of a Supplement Counter simply states
"there is one additional unit of this type here!" There
must always be at least one actual unit (controlled by
the same player) of the appropriate type in the same
system, or on the same planet, as a Supplement
Counter.
Players may, at any time, replace any number of
Ground Forces and/or Fighters in a system/planet with
an equal number of Fighter/Ground Force Supplement
Counters as long as at least one original unit remains.
The actual units are placed back among a player's
reinforcements, and the appropriate Supplement
Counters are taken from the common play area and
placed on the board in the same spot.
Likewise, players may, at any time, replace
Supplement Counters on the board with actual units
from their reinforcements (if able). Players must do
this when they want to split the forces without sufficient actual units present.
Example: On a planet containing three Xxcha Ground
Force units, the Xxcha player may replace two of the
Ground Force units with two Ground Force
Supplement Counters (by placing the actual units
back with his reinforcements, and placing the two
Ground Force Supplement Counters under the
remaining unit). The planet is still considered to have
three Ground Force units, and the Xxcha player may
choose to replace the Supplement Counters with actual units from his reinforcements at any time. Note that
Page 19

Technology
Specialty

Resources

Influence

The real points of interest in the TI galaxy are its
planets. Each planet is printed with its resource
value, influence value, and possibly a technology specialty. When a player successfully invades
a planet (neutral or enemy), he immediately
claims its corresponding Planet Card.
Resources represent a planet's economic surplus,
which can be used by its owner to purchase units
and technology.
Influence represents a planet's population, knowledge base, and/or political importance. Influence
is used to acquire Command Counters, to play
certain Action Cards, and to provide vital votes at
the Galactic Council.
Technology specialties represent a certain local
knowledge or a natural resource important to a
specific area of science. This provides the owner
of the planet with a discount resource towards
purchasing advances of that technology type.

the Xxcha player may not have replaced all three
Ground Forces with Supplement Counters, since one
actual unit must always be with Supplement Counters
of its kind.
Be careful that, in multi-planet systems, each planet
with Ground Force Supplement Counters contain at
least one actual Ground Force unit.

It is only really necessary for a player to use
Supplement Counters if he is about to run out of actual units in his reinforcement pile. In some instances,
it is possible that there is too little physical room on a
given planet/system, and that a player may wish to
create more room by replacing some Ground
Force/Fighter units with counters.

The Race Sheet

A player may, during production, produce Supplement
Counters, but only if the producing system/planet contains at least one actual unit of that type after the production is complete.
As stated, Supplement Counters are simply additional
units of the indicated type, and therefore also must
behave under all the same rules as the actual unit. In
other words, Fighter Supplement Counters must have
sufficient Carrier/Space Dock/War Sun capacity in
order to exist. Ground Force Supplement Counters
must be transported by a Carrier in order to move to
another planet, etc.
Note that when Supplement Counters are transported
by a Carrier or War Sun, at least one actual unit of
that type must also be transported by that same
Carrier/War Sun.
The Race Sheet provides a wealth of useful
information and is used to manage a player’s
active Command Counters. Here is a brief
explanation of the player Race Sheet:
1

Race Title and Symbol
The symbol and title of the represented race.
2

Starting Units and Special Abilities
The starting units/technologies, and the special abilities of the race.
3

Phase and Sequence Tables
A detailed overview of the important phases
and sequences of the game round.
4

Unit Data
A detailed chart with the costs, combat value,
movement rating, and special abilities of each
unit type.

6

The Fleet Supply
Command Counters herein are flipped to
their “Fleet” side, so that they do not mix
with the other Command Counters on the
Race Sheet. The number of Command
Counters herein determines the allowable
size of a player’s fleets.
7

The Command Pool
A player must spend Command Counters
from this area when activating systems on the
game board (when taking a Tactical or
Transfer Action).

If a Supplement Counter is on system/planet without
an actual unit of its type, it is immediately removed.
An easy way to manage your Supplement Counters is
to always place them under an actual unit of their
type in the area. As long as a Supplement Counter is
under an actual unit of its type, it will always conform
to the rules.

THE COMMAND COUNTERS

8

The Trade Goods Area
When a player receives a Trade Good counter, it is placed in this area. A player may give
Trade Goods to other players at any time, or
use Trade Good as a substitute for spending
either one resource or one influence.

5

The Strategy Allocation Area
Command Counters herein can be spent to
execute the secondary abilities of Strategy
cards (and a few other special functions).

Page 20

At the start of the game, players are each provided
with a total of 16 Command Counters. During the
game, these counters will be either on a player's Race
Sheet or with his reinforcements.

Whenever a player receives a Command Counter from
his reinforcements, he must immediately place it on
his Race Sheet in one of the three following areas:

As a player increases the number of Command
Counters in his Fleet Supply area, he may increase the
size of his fleets on the board correspondingly.

SPENDING RESOURCES
INFLUENCE

- The Strategy Allocation Area
- The Fleet Supply Area
- The Command Pool Area

It is important to note that a player may have any
number of active fleets on the board, as long as
each fleet contains a number of ships that is equal to,
or less, than its owner's Fleet Supply limit.

Throughout a game of TI, you will need to spend
resources and influence for many different purposes.
Both resources and influence are provided by the
planets under your control, and you will use their corresponding Planet Cards to keep track of your expenditures.

These three areas represent three distinctly different
vital areas of managing your race. Once a player
places a Command Counter in one of these areas, he
may not move it to a different area until the upcoming
Status Phase. Decisions on where to place and how to
spend Command Counters are among the most important that a player will make during the game.
When a player spends a Command Counter, or uses a
Command Counter to activate a system, he must
remove the counter from the appropriate area of his
Race Sheet and return it to his reinforcements.
In detail, the effects and rules for each of the three
areas are as follows:

THE FLEET SUPPLY AREA
The number of Command Counters in a player's Fleet
Supply area dictates the maximum number of ships
(not including Fighters) that a player may have in
any given system on the board. A player may never
move units, build units, or otherwise acquire units in
any system so that the number of ships herein (again,
excluding Fighters) exceed the number of Command
Counters in his Fleet Supply area. If, for any reason,
the number of ships in a system should exceed the
number of Command Counters in a player's Fleet
Supply, the owner of those ships must immediately
remove enough ships from the system (by placing
them back with his reinforcements) until the
number of ships is again in compliance with the
number of Command Counters in his Fleet
Supply area.
When a player places a Command Counter in
his Fleet Supply area, it is placed with the
"Fleet" side up, to indicate that it is a part of
the Fleet Supply area. In this way, other players can easily identify your fleet limit from
across the table, and it helps prevent your
counters from mixing with the Command
Counters in the two other areas.

As noted, Fighter units do not count toward the Fleet
Supply limit. A player may thus have any number of
Fighter units in a given system, as long as he has the
capacity to support them (see the Fighter unit on page
29).

The Command Pool Area
After a player decides to take a Tactical or Transfer
Action during the Action Phase, he must take an
available Command Counter from his Command Pool
in order to activate a system on the board. If a player
has no Command Counters remaining in his
Command Pool, he is not able to take Tactical or
Transfer Actions. In other words, the number of
Command Counters in a player's Command Pool dictates the amount of activity he can initiate on the
board.

The Strategy Allocation Area
Generally, Command Counters in the Strategy
Allocation area are spent to execute the Secondary
Abilities of Strategy Cards. Some races have special
abilities and some Action Cards require their players
to spend Command Counters from their Strategy
Allocation area for other effects.

Resource Value

AND

Influence Value
Planet Name

Exhausting Planets
Whenever you want to spend influence or resources
you must exhaust one of your Planet Cards by turning
it face down. This provides you with the resources or
influence of that planet. Each Planet Card (and the
planets on the board themselves) shows the specific
information on how many resources and how much
influence is gained from exhausting that specific planet (see the diagram above). A face down Planet Card
cannot be exhausted again until it is refreshed during
the Status Phase (or by another effect). When a card is
refreshed, it is simply returned to its face-up position.
When you exhaust a planet for its
resources or influence, it provides
you with all of its resources or
influence. You cannot use the
resources or influence of a
planet partially, nor can you
save a portion for later.

Example of Spending Resources and Production

The N’orr player has just activated a system containing one of his Space
Docks. As the final step of the Activation Sequence, he now wishes to
produce units in the system.
The N’orr player takes 1 Carrier, one Destroyer, and one Cruiser from
his reinforcements. Referring to his Race Sheet, the N’orr player notes
that the cost for these units are as follows:
1 Carrier
1 Destroyer
1 Cruiser
Total

After paying for the production, the N’orr player takes the three units
and places them in the activated system. Since the activated system
already held a Carrier unit, he now has a fleet of 4 units (remember that
Fighters do not count towards Fleet Size) in the system. Since the N’orr
player has 4 command counters on his Fleet Supply, the Fleet is not in
violation of the N’orr Fleet limit.

3 Resources
2 Resources
1 Resources
= 6 Resources

Note that when exhausting a planet, it will provide
you with either its resource value or its influence
value, but not both. Before exhausting a planet, you
must announce whether you are exhausting it for its
resources or for its influence (in most cases it is clear
for what purpose you are exhausting a planet).

Paying Costs
Whenever a player wishes to spend resources or influence, he simply announces the total amount of
resources/influence that he wishes to spend, and then
exhausts the number of Planet Cards with that (or
greater) combined amount of resources/influence.
In other words, when a player is producing units at a
Space Dock during the Production step of the
Activation Sequence, he may simply announce how

The planet can produce up to 5 units, so the production capacity of the
planet is not a problem. To pay for three units, however, the N’orr player
must spend 6 resources. As he has no Trade Goods on his Race Sheet,
the N’orr player takes three of his ready Planet Cards, with a combined
resource value of 6, and exhausts those planet cards (by flipping them
face down) to pay for the three units that he wishes to buy.

many resources he is going to spend in total. Then he
exhausts the appropriate number of planets and places
the produced units on the board (see rules for producing units under the Space Dock unit on page 26). This
means that you are not producing (and spending
resources on) a single unit at a time, but rather purchasing the production with one lump sum. The same
goes for spending influence.
Any spare resources or influence provided by an
exhausted Planet Card are lost.
Special Note: You do not have to exhaust a specific
Planet Card to pay for the cost of production at
that exact planet; any resources will do.

Page 22

THE ACTION CARDS

Throughout the game, players will come into possession of Action Cards. Action Cards should be kept
hidden from other players.
An Action Card can only be used given the specific
circumstances (or phase) printed on each individual
card.

The Political Agenda

A player may never have more than 7 Action Cards at
any one time. If, after receiving additional cards, a
player has more than 7 Action Cards in his hand, he
must immediately choose and discard cards until he
has 7. If a player at 7 cards is about to draw additional cards, he should draw and discard one Action Card
at a time.

Every Political Card contains an agenda that requires
a vote in the Galactic Council (i.e., the players). As
the first step of convening the Galactic Council, the
active player reads aloud the drawn Political Card and
makes it clear what kind of vote is about to be cast.

A player may never play two identical Action Cards
for the same situation and/or on the same entity during one round. Example: A player cannot play two
"Flank Speed" Action Cards on the same fleet in one
round. The player may, however, play a “Flank
Speed” on two different fleets in the same round.

"ELECT" VOTES
When a political agenda asks the Galactic Council to
elect something or someone, each player may choose
who or what to nominate (i.e., elect) when casting his
vote. That player's entire vote is now attributed
towards that subject. The subject with the highest
number (not necessarily the majority) of the total
votes is considered elected. After this, follow the
instructions on the Political Card.

How to Play an Action Card
If a player wishes to play an Action Card, he must
publicly announce that he wishes to play an Action
Card. Then other players, at that time, may announce
that they also wish to play an Action Card. After all
players have been given the opportunity to announce
that they are playing Action Cards, all the Action
Cards are revealed and resolved in order of play.
If Action Cards are about to played at a time where
players do not have Strategy Cards, then resolve them
in clockwise order starting with the Speaker.

THE SABOTAGE ACTION CARD
A player does not have to announce the playing of a
Sabotage card. The Sabotage card is simply played
immediately after an Action Card has been revealed,
cancelling its effect. Then both cards are discarded.
"PLAY AS AN ACTION"
Some Action Cards read “Play: As an action.” This
Action Card must played by its owner during the
Action Phase instead of taking a regular action.

THE POLITICAL CARDS
GALACTIC COUNCIL

AND THE

AND

CARDS

If the effect of a card seems to contradict the rules
of the game, the card text is always correct.

There are two types of agenda votes:

"FOR OR AGAINST" VOTES
Most agendas will ask the Galactic Council to vote
for or against a certain agenda. In this type of vote,
players indicate either “for” or “against” when casting
their vote, The majority of all votes cast will decide
the outcome.
LAWS
Some agendas are "Laws." Laws represent permanent
changes to the rules and/or flow of the game. When a
Law is voted "for," first enact any effects of the "for"
result and then place the Political Card face up in the
common play area. The effects of this card are now
permanent. If voted "against," resolve any effects
that an "against" result may have and then discard the
card.
Although the council might have adopted a Law earlier in the game, the balance of power can later have
shifted, and old Laws soon become unpopular. If this
happens, how can the council reverse the old Law?
Among the Political Cards, there are certain agendas
that allow older Laws to be either reevaluated or discarded. Note that these cards are few and that most
enacted Laws are in the game to stay, so be careful
how you vote.

Voting in the Galactic Council
After the active player has read the agenda out loud,
the Galactic Council must resolve the agenda in the
following way:
When the player who controls the Political Strategy
Card executes his Strategic Action, a Political Card
must be drawn and the Galactic Council convenes to
debate and vote upon its agenda.

RULES

1) Players first debate, threaten, lure, or convince each
other to vote in their favor. Trade Good Counters may
be used as "bribes" but no promises or agreements in
TI are binding (even after receiving a bribe or payoff).
Page 23

2) Players then vote upon the agenda. Voting is done
clockwise one player at a time, starting with the player to the left of the Speaker (thus the Speaker will
always cast the last vote). When voting, a player has
as many votes as the total combined influence value
of all his unexhausted planets (and a minimum of 1
vote). Example: The Letnev player controls five planets, but has exhausted three of them . His two remaining unexhausted planets have influence values of "2"
and "1." The Letnev player therefore has a total of 3
votes during the Galactic Council.
When voting, a player must cast all his votes or none.
Votes cannot be split. Voting does not cause your
Planet Cards to exhaust.
Trade Good counters cannot be used to gain additional votes.
The Galactic Council is meant to be a fun, active
engagement in which players forge alliances, use their
political prowess, engage in saber-rattling, and "act
their race." As powerful agendas are presented to the
council, weaker players can seek to hurt strong neighbors politically via the enactment of damaging Laws
or other agendas.

ABSTAINING AND TIE VOTES
A player may always choose to abstain from voting
during any agenda. If so, his votes are simply not
counted for purposes of resolving the agenda (including determining a majority). If there is a tie vote, even
a tie of "0" (in which all players have abstained), the
player holding the Speaker Token breaks the tie.

Example: If a player controls three planets with the
green technology specialty (Biotech), he may subtract
three from the cost of purchasing green Technology
Cards.

TECHNOLOGY ADVANCES

Action Phase. The active player receives a free
Technology advance, and other players may pay 8
resources to acquire one Technology advance.
Most Technology advances (but not all) have prerequisite technologies. Before a Technology advance can
be acquired, a player must already have obtained all
prerequisite technologies printed on the card.

Before the game begins, each player is provided with
an identical deck of 24 Technology advances, and
each player starts the game with a few “Starting
Technology” advances. When a player has successfully acquired (or received at the start of the game) a
Technology advance, he takes the respective
Technology Card and places it face up before him in
his play area. In this way, players will slowly accumulate Technology Cards, each providing a helpful
advantage described on the card itself.
Example: After acquiring the “Deep Space Cannon”
technology, a player’s PDS units may fire at adjacent
systems, rather than just their own.

Example: The “Micro Technology” advance requires
that a player has either the “Stasis Capsules“ or
“Sarween Tools” Technology advances already. If the
player has neither of these prerequisites technologies
in his play area, he is not allowed to acquire the
“Micro Technology” advance.
A player is not allowed to acquire a technology (via
Action Cards, or otherwise) if he does not already
have the prerequisite technologies face up in his play
area.
You will find a handy “Tech Tree” diagram on page
42-43 of this rules booklet, and you will also find this
diagram available for download at www.fantasyflightgames.com.

PLANETARY TECHNOLOGY SPECIALTIES

Technology Cards are normally acquired during the
resolution of the Technology Strategy Card, but can
also be acquired via certain Action and Political
Cards.
Technology Specialty

Players may not give each other Technology
advances.
There are four different technology areas, each attributed the following color:
Warfare Technology
Biotechnology
Propulsion Technology
General Technology

= Red
= Green
= Blue
= Yellow

ACQUIRING A TECHNOLOGY ADVANCE
In general Technology advances are acquired when
the Technology Strategy Card is executed during the

Some planets have a technology specialty (a printed
technology symbol by the planet itself and on the
Planet Card). Technology specialties represent a certain local knowledge or a natural resource important
to a specific area of science. The presence of a technology specialty gives the owner of the planet the
ability to purchase a Technology Card (of the specific
type: red, green, or blue) for 1 less than its normal
cost when executing the secondary ability of the
Technology Strategy Card. If a player controls multiple planets with technology specialties of the same
color/type, the cost to acquire that technology type is
lowered by 1 for each such planet.
Page 24

Technology specialty discounts do not apply if the
contributing Planet Card(s) is exhausted. (It is not
necessary to exhaust a planet with the technology specialty in order to receive the discount, nor is it necessary to exhaust that specific planet to buy the
Technology advance).

TRADE CONTRACTS
AGREEMENTS

AND

TRADE

In TI, trading is an important avenue for players to
gain additional resources and influence. Trade can be
used as important political leverage against hostile
players or to help seal an important alliance.
At the beginning of the game, each race is provided
with two Trade Cards, each with a numerical trade
value printed on the “trade agreement” side of the
card (you may notice that some races have Trade
Cards of differing trade values). At the beginning of
the game, players should place these cards with the
“Trade Contract“ side up in their playing area. This
side has no trade value, as players derive no value
from their own Trade Cards.

OPENING TRADE AGREEMENTS
When the primary ability of the Trade Strategy Card
is being resolved during the Action Phase, the active
player may allow players (himself included) to forge
trade agreements.
A trade agreement is initiated between two players
who agree to trade with each other. After agreeing to
trade, each of the two players must give the partner
one of their own Trade Cards. Upon receiving another
player’s Trade Card, a player should place it before
him with the trade agreement side face up.
Only one Trade Card for each player may be
exchanged, not more.

Definition of an
“Empty“ System
The TI rules and cards will sometimes refer to
an “empty” system. An empty system is a system completely free of units, including units
belonging to the active player. In other words,
an empty system is one that is free from ship,
Ground Force, PDS, or Space Dock units. The
system may, however, contain planets, Control
Markers, and Command Counters. Special
Systems are not considered empty systems.

Since every race has only two Trade Cards, each player may only have two active trade agreements at any
one time.

A player receives Trade Goods by simply counting the
total trade value of any trade agreements in his play
area. The player then takes that number of Trade
Goods from the common play area and places them
on the Trade Goods area of his Race Sheet.
Example: The Xxcha currently has an active trade
agreement with the Jol Nar player (as illustrated on
the “Player Area” diagram on page 9). After the
active player has finished the primary ability of the
Trade Strategy Card, the Xxcha spends one Command
Counter from his Strategy Allocation area to execute
the secondary ability of the Trade Strategy Card. The
Jol Nar trade agreement has a trade value of “3.”
The Xxcha player takes three Trade Good counters
from the common play area and places them on the
Trade Goods area of his Race Sheet.

The Trade Goods Counters

Before a trade agreement can be completed, the agreement must first be approved by the active player. If
approved (and that may take some bribes to the active
player), the players may exchange Trade cards.
Two players may only make one trade agreement
with each other. Thus, for a player to utilize both of
his Trade Cards, he must make trade agreements with
two different opponents. If able, a player may initiate
both of his trade agreements during the same execution of a Trade Strategy Card.
It is important to note that since each player only has
two Trade Cards, he cannot make more than two trade
agreements.

RECEIVING TRADE GOODS
While executing the primary ability of the Trade
Strategy Card, the first player receives Trade Goods
for his trade agreements (and 3 extra trade goods).
After the active player has completed the primary
ability, the other players, clockwise from the active
player, may execute the secondary ability of the Trade
Strategy Card to receive Trade Goods for their trade
agreements.
Note that players are not allowed to collect trade
income from trade agreements formed during the
same action. It is not possible for a player to make a
trade agreement during the primary ability of the
Trade Strategy Card, and then immediately collect
trade income from the new trade agreement by executing the secondary ability.

Players may spend Trade Good counters from their
Trade Goods area as a substitute for spending either
one resource or one influence. In this way, a player
can pay for a Dreadnought unit by spending 5 Trade
Goods from his Trade Goods area, or by exhausting
Planet Cards for 3 resources, and paying the remaining 2 resources with Trade Goods (or any combination
thereof).
When a player spends a Trade Good, he simply moves
it from his Trade Goods area to the common play
area.
Players are allowed to give other players Trade Goods
from their Race Sheet at any time. This makes the
Trade Goods counter a flexible currency with which
to bribe, pay, or assist other players economically.
Running out of Trade Goods
There are exactly 40 Trade Goods in the game, if the
Trade supply in the common play area is empty, then
players cannot receive additional Trade Goods
until a player spends some and returns them to the
Page 25

common play area once more. Since there is a limit
to the total number of Trade Goods, it is important to
adhere to the player order of executing the secondary
ability of the Trade Strategy Card, which is always
done in clockwise order from the active player.

BREAKING TRADE AGREEMENTS
Any player involved in a trade agreement may unilaterally break the agreement during the Status Phase.
Such a player simply announces that he is ending the
agreement and immediately returns the Trade Card to
its owner and retrieves his own Trade Card from the
former trading partner (a player’s own Trade Cards
are always returned with the “Trade Contract” side
face up, as they provide no trade value for their
owner). It is not possible for a player to automatically
break a trade agreement with the Hacan race, as per
the Hacan's special ability.
If two trading players become involved in open war
against each other (by one player initiating either a
Space Battle or Invasion Combat against the other),
a trade agreement between the two players is automatically broken (and the Trade Cards returned to their
owners). The two players may later open another
trade agreement, but this will again be broken if
another Space Battle or Invasion Combat occurs
between them. Trade agreements with the Hacan player are broken in the event of open war between the
Hacan and its trading partner.
Note that only Space Battles and Invasion Combat
will automatically break a trade agreement between
two players. Playing Action Cards or taking shots
with a PDS, etc., does not cause an automatic break.
Invading a planet that contains only an enemy Control
Marker is still considered Invasion Combat for purposes of cancelling trade agreements.

THE POWER OF THE MERCHANTS GUILD
When executing the primary ability of the Trade
Strategy, the active player may choose to exercise his
control of the Merchant’s guild in a destructive way,
rather than facilitating the wealth of other races.
As described in option “b” of the Trade Strategy Card,
the active player, instead of receiving Trade Goods
and opening trade negotiations, may instead choose to
cancel every trade agreement in play.
If the active player chooses this option, all Trade
Cards (including those of the active player and the
Hacan) are returned to their owners.

THE OBJECTIVE CARDS

Rules for
Units
Following is a detailed breakdown of the characteristics and rules for the 9 different unit types in TI that
players have at their disposal.

The Objective Cards represent the primary way for
players to receive victory points. Each Objective Card
(both Secret and Public) contains a requirement and a
victory point award for meeting that requirement. The
Public Objective Cards are slowly revealed as the
Imperial Strategy Card is resolved during the Action
Phase.
During the first step of the Status Phase, players may
qualify for the requirements of one revealed Public
Objective Card in order to receive the corresponding
victory points. Note that a player cannot gain victory
points from a Public Objective Card that is not yet
revealed.
Some Objective Cards state “Now I…”. This requires
a player to actually fulfill the requirement during the
first step of the Status Phase. For example, one
Objective Card reads “I now spend 20 Resources (2
victory points).” In order for a player to receive these
two victory points, he must have enough Trade Goods
and unexhausted planets to spend 20 resources during
the first step of the Status Phase.
A player may only receive victory points from a specific revealed Objective Card once per game. After
collecting victory points from an Objective Card, a
player should, to serve as a reminder, place one of his
Control Markers on the card.

THE SECRET OBJECTIVE CARD
At the beginning of the game, each player receives a
Secret Objective Card. A player is not allowed to
show other players his Secret Objective Card until he
is able to meet its objectives during the first step of
the Status Phase. A player who reveals his Secret
Objective Card without being able to meet its requirements loses his Secret Objective Card, which is
placed back in the box. Such a player will not be able
to receive victory points from a Secret Objective for
the duration of the game.
During the Status Phase, a player may qualify for one
Public Objective Card and/or his Secret Objective
Card. A player cannot qualify for more than one
Public Objective Cards in one round.

THE SPACE DOCK

Units Available: 3
Cost: 4
The Space Dock unit represents a military industrial
complex, shipyard, and recruiting station in close orbit
of a specific planet. In order to build units (other than
another Space Dock) in a given system or on a specific planet, a Space Dock must be present there.

BUILDING A NEW SPACE DOCK
In order to build a new Space Dock on a planet, the
following requirements must be met:
1) The system (that contains the planet on which you
want to build the Space Dock) has just been activated,
and is currently at the “Production” step of the
Activation or Transfer Sequence.
2) The active player must have controlled the planet
for the entire current round. Thus, it is not possible
to build a Space Dock on a planet that has just been
acquired during the current round.
3) The planet does not already contain a Space Dock
(only one Space Dock per planet is allowed).
4) The system does not contain any enemy ships.
If these requirements are met, the activating player
may take an available Space Dock from his reinforcements, spend 4 resources, and place the Space Dock
on the chosen planet. Next round the Space Dock may
begin producing units for its owner. It is important to
remember that a Space Dock is tied to a specific planet and is not considered to be “in space” and so does
not participate in Space Battle, nor can it be attacked
directly by enemy ships.
Building Units at a Space Dock
In order to produce new units (other than a new Space
Dock), players must activate (via a Tactical or

Page 26

Transfer Action) a system that contains at least one
friendly Space Dock. As the last step in resolving the
activation of the system, the activating player may
spend resources to build units at the Space Dock, governed by the following rules:
• A Space Dock may only build a number of units
(regardless of type) equal to the resource value of its
planet plus two. This means that a Space Dock located on a planet with a resource value of 3 may produce
up to 5 different units (3 for the resource value of the
planet, plus 2 for the Space Dock itself). This restriction is for the number of units, regardless of their total
resource cost. Thus the above planet with a production limit of 5 may produce 5 Dreadnoughts or 5
Fighters (or any combination of those, and other,
units).
• New spaceships (Fighters, Cruisers, Carriers,
Destroyers, Dreadnoughts, and War Suns), when built,
are placed directly (and always exist) in space. Each
system represents one area of space. Unlike Ground
Forces, PDS, and the Space Dock itself, spaceships
are never considered to be on, attached to, or affiliated
with a planet in their current system.
• Ground Force and PDS units are always built and
placed on the planet containing the Space Dock.
Ground Force and PDS units cannot move to another
planet (including other planets in the same system)
unless transported by a Carrier or War Sun.
• Note that when purchasing either Fighter or Ground
Force units, 1 resource provides two units. If, due to
the production limit of a Space Dock, a player wishes
to only purchase 1 Ground Force or Fighter unit, the
single unit still costs 1 resource. A player may not
“mix and match“ when purchasing Ground Forces and
Fighters, such as purchasing one of each for only one
resource.
Other Rules for Space Docks
• A Space Dock has the capacity to support 3 Fighter
units in its system (see later).
• If a system contains at least one enemy spaceship,
all friendly Space Docks in that system are considered
under blockade, and may not produce spaceship
units while the enemy units are in the system. A
Space Dock under blockade may still build Ground
Forces and PDS on its planet during the Production
step of the Activation Sequence.

Strategy Tip: Cruisers and Destroyers are especially useful for swooping in from afar to blockade your Space Docks. Be cautious if fast enemy
ships are within range, and try not to rely on
just one Space Dock for your production, especially later in the game.

Example of Carrier Transport

THE GROUND FORCE UNIT

Units available: 12 (plus supplement counters)
Cost: 1 (produces two Ground Force units)
The Ground Force unit represents a player's military and occupational forces. It is an essential unit
necessary to take over neutral planets, invade
enemy planets, or defend your own planets against
enemy invasion. Ground Forces are governed by
the following rules:
• Ground Forces, when produced, are placed on the
planet of the producing Space Dock. Ground
Forces are primarily transported around the galaxy
by Carrier units (although the War Sun unit, as
well as certain Technology advancements, can
facilitate other means of Ground Force transportation). A Ground Force unit is never considered to
be in “space,“ as it is always either on a planet or
being transported inside a Carrier/War Sun.
• A Carrier unit may, at any point during its movement, pick up a Ground Force unit located on a
planet in the same system as the moving Carrier
(see more details under the Carrier unit).
Exception: A Carrier, when moving through an
already activated system, may not pick up
Ground Forces there.
• During the Planetary Landings step of the
Activation Sequence, Ground Forces on a Carrier
unit may move directly onto any friendly, hostile,
or neutral planet in the same system.
Controlling Planets
To take control of a planet, a player must always have
successfully landed at least one friendly Ground Force
on that planet. Unless the planet is later lost to another
player by invasion, a planet will remain under a player's control for the remainder of the game. If the last
of a player's Ground Force units leaves a planet, the
player simply places one of his Control Markers on
the planet to indicate his ownership.

The N'orr player has activated a system two
spaces away from his Carrier unit. Since the
N’orr player owns the XRD TRANSPORTER Technology advance, his Carrier
units can move an extra space. The Carrier
unit above is therefore capable of reaching
the activated system.
Before moving, the Carrier picks up the 4
Ground Force units in its starting system.
Now the N’orr player must choose between
the two possible routes to the activated system.
1

When moving along this route, the
Carrier will move through a system that the
N’orr player has already activated earlier in
the same round. Although this does not affect

Example: During the previous round, the Xxcha player invaded the neutral planet Dal Bootha with a single Ground Force unit. This round the Xxcha player
wishes to move his Ground Force on Dal Bootha to a
different planet. During his turn of the Action Phase,
he activates another system and moves the Carrier
here. Before moving out of the Dal Bootha system, his
Carrier picks up the Ground Force unit here. As the
Ground Force is picked up, the Xxcha player places
one of his Control Markers on Dal Bootha to indicate
his continued control over the planet.
Page 27

the movement of the Carrier, the Carrier may
not pick up the Ground Force unit in that system because of the prior activation.
2

By choosing to move along this route,
the Carrier could pick up the Ground Force
unit while moving through the lower middle
system.
When arriving at the activated system, the
N’orr player may even pick up the Ground
Force units there (as long as the Carrier does
not exceed its maximum of 6 units).
After moving , the N’orr Carrier will drop its
Ground Force units on the neutral planet during the Planetary Landings step of the
Activation Sequence.

Examples of PDS fire

1

The N’orr player has just activated a
system containing an Xxcha fleet. After the
N’orr fleet has moved into the activated system, the N’orr player may fire upon the Xxcha
Fleet with his PDS unit in the adjacent system.
This is allowed because the N’orr player has
acquired the “Deep Space Cannon” Technology
advance which allows his PDS the extra range
to fire upon adjacent systems when activated.

THE CARRIER UNIT

Units Available: 4
Cost: 3
The Carrier unit is the primary vehicle for expanding
territory by transporting friendly Ground Forces and
PDS units from system to system. In addition to the
mundane task of transportation, the Carrier can also
be a formidable weapon as it may bring swarms of
deadly and inexpensive Fighter units to bear against
your enemies.
A Carrier unit has a capacity of 6. You may think of

2

The N’orr player has activated a
system containing an Xxcha planet with
two PDS.
After the N’orr fleet has finished moving
into the system, the two Xxcha PDS units
(and possible other enemy PDS units in
range, if any) may fire at the N’orr fleet in
the system.

capacity as open “slots,” for which each slot may hold
a Ground Force, PDS, or Fighter unit. Unlike the
Space Dock, which has a special capacity that will
support 3 Fighter units (and no Ground Forces or
PDS), the Carrier will hold units of all three types
(Fighters, Ground Forces, and PDS). A Carrier is not
restricted to carrying units of only one kind, but can
carry any mix of the three unit types. Example: A
Carrier unit holds 4 Fighter units, 1 Ground Force
unit, and 1 PDS unit, or any combination thereof.
• A Carrier can never carry more than 6 units, so be
careful to keep track of how full your Carriers are.
Excess units on a Carrier must be immediately
destroyed (chosen by the Carrier’s owner).
• If a Carrier is destroyed, any Ground Force and PDS
units aboard the Carrier are automatically destroyed.
Fighter units can survive if the current system has
Page 28

3

During the Planetary Landings
step of the Activation Sequence, the
N’orr player decides to land three
Ground Force units on the Xxcha
planet containing one Ground Force
unit and one PDS.
Before Invasion Combat begins, the
Xxcha PDS unit may fire at the invading Ground Force units.

enough capacity to support the Fighters (supplied by
either another Carrier, War Sun, or Space Dock).
• Note that Ground Forces do not participate in any
battle while being transported by a Carrier unit.
Likewise, while aboard a Carrier, PDS units do not
function. Fighters, on the other hand, are not considered “on board“ the Carrier, and may participate in
any Space Battle in the system.
• A Carrier can only “unload” its Ground Forces and
PDS onto a planet, or onto another Carrier, during the
Planetary Landings step of the Activation Sequence.
Yet, it may pick up units from any system in which it
started its movement, passed through while moving,
or ended its movement. To this, there are the following exceptions:
- A Carrier may never pick up units in a system that

contains enemy spaceships. In other words, a Carrier
may not move into a system containing enemy spaceships, pick up units, and then fight a Space Battle.
A Carrier may never pick up units from a system that
has been previously activated by the same player.

THE PLANETARY DEFENSE SYSTEM
(PDS) UNIT

Units Available: 6
Cost: 2
The PDS unit represents both anti-fleet and planetary
invasion countermeasures (missiles and enormous
energy cannons) as well as a planetary shield. The
rules for using the various abilities of the PDS unit are
as follows:

PLANETARY SHIELD
During the Invasion Combat step of the Activation
Sequence, enemy Dreadnoughts may not bombard a
planet containing an enemy PDS unit. (See page 17
for additional information on Invasion Combat.)
SPACE CANNON
A PDS unit is capable of firing its massive arsenal
into space in order to destroy nearby enemy ships.
The basic range of a PDS reaches only into its own
system, but by acquiring the “Deep Space Cannon”
players can extend the range of their PDS units into
adjacent systems.
A PDS “space cannon attack” is always fired during
the third step of the Activation Sequence, and only
given one of the two conditions below:
• After the owner of the PDS has activated a system,
and after any friendly ship movement into the system,
each of the active player's PDS units in range may
fire once at any enemy fleet in the activated system
before a Space Battle begins.
Note that the activating player's PDS units (that are in
range) may fire even if the player did not move any
ships into the system during the activation. In other
words, it is possible for a player to activate a system
purely for the purposes of firing his PDS at an enemy
fleet in range.
• When a player activates a system in range of an

enemy PDS unit, the owners of any enemy PDS units
in range may, after the movement step of the
Activation Sequence, fire once per PDS at any units
in the system owned by the activating player. Note
that when firing your PDS units during another player's activation, you may only fire at the units controlled by the activating player. It is thus not possible
to draw third party PDS fire at an enemy fleet by simply activating its system from afar.

INVASION DEFENSE
Immediately before the first round of an Invasion
Combat, any defending PDS units on a planet may
fire, once per PDS, at the invading Ground Forces.
This is a one-time pre-combat shot only and does not
occur before every other round of the subsequent
Invasion Combat.
FIRING PDS UNITS
When firing a PDS unit, simply roll one die for each
PDS involved. For each result equal to or greater than
the combat value of the PDS (normally a 6), the
enemy fleet (or invading Ground Force units) must
immediately take a casualty without being granted
return fire.
PDS LIMITATION
A player may never have more than two PDS units on
a planet. A planet already holding two PDS units cannot produce a third.
TRANSPORTING PDS
PDS units are always produced on the planet of the
producing Space Dock. PDS units cannot move of
their own volition. Like Ground Forces, PDS units
must be transported to other planets via a Carrier or a
War Sun unit.

• Fighters are always considered to be in space, even
while being transported. Thus fighters will always
participate in any Space Battle in their system.
• Fighters require at all times that their present system
has sufficient capacity to sustain them. A Space Dock
has a capacity for 3 Fighters, a Carrier (if not carrying
any Ground Forces or PDS) a capacity of 6, and a
War Sun (if not carrying any Ground Forces or PDS)
also a capacity of 6. If a system contains more Fighter
units than its capacity allows, the owner of the Fighter
units must immediately return enough Fighters to his
reinforcement pile so that the number of Fighter units
and the system's capacity is equal.
Example: A system that contains one Space Dock and
one Carrier (currently transporting two Ground
Forces) can safely maintain 7 Fighter units (three for
the Space Dock and 4 for the Carrier). Should the
Carrier leave the system, 4 of the 7 Fighter units must
move with the Carrier to prevent an excess of Fighter
units in the system.
Note that a system's Fighter capacity is not relevant
during a Space Battle. This means that Fighters participating in a Space Battle can continue to fight even if
their Carrier has been destroyed. After a Space Battle
has ended, however, Fighter units without sufficient
supporting capacity are immediately removed.

THE CRUISER UNIT

THE FIGHTER UNIT

Units Available: 10 (plus supplement counters)
Cost: 1 (to produce two Fighter units)
The Fighter unit is the most inexpensive ship in a
player's arsenal. Fighters, which are typically moved
into battle by Carrier units, can overwhelm an enemy
by their sheer numbers and are vital to bolster a player's fleet against enemy fire.
Fighters are governed by the following rules:
• Fighters cannot move by themselves and require the
transport of a Carrier unit to move around the board.
Page 29

Units Available: 8
Cost: 2
The Cruiser unit is among the most effective ships in
the TWILIGHT IMPERIUM galaxy. For a fair price,
the Cruiser unit delivers an effective punch in combat
and gives its owner the flexibility of great speed.
There are no other special rules that govern the
Cruiser unit.

THE DESTROYER UNIT

THE DREADNOUGHT UNIT

(in the same system) during the same activation, the
active player must decide how to divide his bombardment. A Dreadnought can only bombard once during
every Activation Sequence.

THE WAR SUN
Units Available: 8
Cost: 1
The Destroyer unit, although not as powerful in combat as its larger cousin, the Cruiser, is a fast, inexpensive, and versatile weapon that can deliver a lethal
blow to any enemy fleet that relies too heavily on
Fighters.

THE DESTROYER ANTI-FIGHTER BARRAGE
Before a Space Battle begins, each Destroyer unit
(both attacking and defending) may roll two combat
dice. For every result equal to or higher than the
Destroyer's combat value (normally a 9), the opponent
must immediately destroy one Fighter unit. Fighters
destroyed in this way are removed before the Space
Battle begins and do not receive return fire. Note that
the Destroyer units special barrage is only fired once
before the actual Space Battle begins, and not before
every Space Battle round.

Units Available: 5
Cost: 5
No unit in the galaxy, except for the legendary War
Sun, can project the firepower and force that is mustered by the awesome Dreadnought. Its massive
weaponry, deadly bombardment option, and mighty
bulwark, makes it the undisputed foundation of any
successful fleet.
The Dreadnought unit provides two unique features:
The ability to sustain damage and to execute a planetary bombardment.

SUSTAINING DAMAGE
A Dreadnought unit can absorb a single hit before it is
destroyed. After taking its first hit (as a result of
Space Battle, PDS fire, or other), turn the
Dreadnought unit on its side to indicate that it has
been damaged. If a damaged Dreadnought is forced to
take another hit, it is destroyed. Other than being one
step closer to destruction, being damaged does not
affect the Dreadnought in any other way.
During the Status Phase, all damaged ships are
repaired and are returned to their normal upright position.

PLANETARY BOMBARDMENT
Immediately before an Invasion Combat, the invading
player's Dreadnoughts in the activated system may
bombard enemy Ground Forces on a contested planet.
A planetary bombardment is executed by simply
allowing the invading player to roll one combat die
for each bombarding Dreadnought. For every hit, the
defending player must immediately remove one
Ground Force unit. Units eliminated by planetary
bombardment do not receive return fire and do not
participate in the subsequent Invasion Combat. Note
that a Dreadnought may not bombard a planet unless
that planet is being invaded by friendly forces that
landed here during the Planetary Landings step of the
Activation Sequence.
A Dreadnought may not bombard a planet that contains at least one PDS. The planet is considered to
have a planetary shield protecting it against missile
and energy attacks from space.
If a player is invading two or more separate planets
Page 30

Units Available: 2
Cost: 12
Most galactic historians reject the notion that a “War
Sun” existed during the forgone Twilight Wars. The
few historians that do argue for its existence mostly
provide only vague proof by outlining a combination
of multiple, seemingly unconnected, folklore tales and
a few old records describing a massive combat vessel
developed by the Jol Nar towards the later years of
the period. There seems to be some evidence that the
Jol Nar, desperately fighting the advancing fleets of
the Sardakk N'orr, brought a secret weapon to bear
against the main N'orr fleet in the Saudor system. It is
plausible that some new weapon was used here, if
only evidenced by the fact that the N'orr never
advanced farther into Jol Nar space. It is also highly
likely that if a War Sun did exist, that it was destroyed

Damaged/Undamaged
Units

Undamaged
units

Damaged
units

When a Dreadnought or War Sun unit takes its
first hit, it is damaged rather than destroyed.
Place the unit on its side to indicate its damaged status (As indicated above).

during this battle, since no trace or rumor can be
found of it after this period. Tangentially collaborating with this conclusion, Xxcha archeologist have
found large samples of ancient wreckage on Saudor
that is of an unknown make and intent.
Perhaps the greatest credence lent to the War Sun theory, or the existence of some other powerful weapon,
has been the inconsistent Jol Nar stance of denial,
silence, and restriction of records on the subject.
Without a doubt, the War Sun unit is the definitive
combat unit of the galaxy. It is more like a fleet unto
itself, than a mere ship. The War Sun boasts an almost
unfathomable firepower, powerful construction,
tremendous speed, capacity to hold great hosts of
troops and fighters, and unparalleled bombardment
strength.
The War Sun unit is subject to the following rules:
• A player may not produce a War Sun unit unless he
has acquired the “War Sun” Technology advance.
• Like the Dreadnought, a War Sun can sustain a single hit (or “damage”) before it is destroyed. As with
the Dreadnought, a War Sun is placed onto its side in
order to indicate its damaged state and will be
destroyed if subjected to another hit. Any damage sustained by a War Sun is automatically repaired during
the Status Phase.
• Like the Dreadnought, a War Sun unit is allowed to
bombard planets. Unlike the Dreadnought, however, a
War Sun ignores the presence of a PDS unit's planetary shield. Also, a War Sun may bombard a planet
during the Invasion Combat step of the Activation
Sequence, even if no friendly Ground Force units
have landed on the planet in an invasion attempt.
• A War Sun unit rolls three combat dice during Space
Battles and Bombardments.
• Like the Carrier unit, a War Sun has a capacity of 6
and may transport Ground Forces, PDS, and Fighter
units.

Optional Rules
Below you will find several exciting options for your
TI game. All the optional rules provided here are
modular and can be used in any combination. It is
recommended that you use the options that appeal the
most to your particular play group.

THREE, FOUR, AND FIVE
PLAYER GAMES
The main rules so far have assumed that you will be
playing TI with 6 players. It is possible, and just as
enjoyable, to play the game with fewer players. If you
wish to play TI with either 3, 4, or 5 players, a few
small changes will be needed to the board setup and
the way Strategy Cards are handled.

The Three Player Game
The following exceptions apply to the three player
game.

CREATING THE GALAXY WITH THREE PLAYERS
Players should randomly draw races as normal, and
place the unused Home Systems back in the box.
Mecatol Rex is placed in the middle of the table as
usual.
Before shuffling the remaining 32 systems, however,
remove 3 empty systems (systems containing a
starfield with no planets) and one Asteriod Field, placing these 4 systems back in the box. Then shuffle the
remaining 28 systems.
After the systems have been shuffled, remove 4 random systems and place them back in the box without
looking at them. Then deal out the remaining 24 systems, so that each player has eight systems.
Players now create the galaxy as normal except the
final board constellation and Home System placement
should match the illustration for the 3 player game
found on the “Galaxy Setup for 3,4, and 5 Players”
diagram.

STRATEGY CARDS IN THE THREE PLAYER GAME
During the Strategy Phase of a three player game,
players must choose 2 Strategy Cards (when normally
players would only choose 1). This is done over two
rounds of selection, with the second round of selection using the same order of selection as the first
round.
Page 31

Since each player will have two Strategy Cards, players must now execute two separate Strategic Actions
at some point during the Action Phase (one for each
of their Strategy Cards) before they are allowed to
pass. Each individual Strategic Action is resolved as
normal. A player may choose which of his Strategy
Cards to execute first.

The Four Player Game
The following exceptions apply to the four player
game.

CREATING THE GALAXY WITH FOUR PLAYERS
Players randomly draw races as normal, placing the
unused Home Systems back in the box. Mecatol Rex
is placed in the middle of the table as usual.
Shuffle the remaining 32 systems (do not remove
any systems beforehand). The first player then deals
the systems to the players, with each player receiving
8 systems.
Players now create the galaxy as normal, with the
final board constellation and home system placement
matching the illustration for the 4 player game as
found on the “Galaxy Setup for 3,4, and 5 Players”
diagram.

STRATEGY CARDS IN THE FOUR PLAYER GAME
The four player game uses the same rules for choosing Strategy Cards as the three player game (with
players choosing two Strategy Cards).
Note that in the four player game, since each player
selects two Strategy Cards, there will be no Strategy
Cards that remain unselected. The “bonus” tokens are
therefore not used in the four player game.
The Initiative Strategy may still not be selected by the
same player twice in a row, unless that player has no
other option.

The Five Player Game
The following exceptions apply to the five player
game.

CREATING THE GALAXY WITH FIVE PLAYERS
Player’s randomly draw races as normal, and the
unused Home Systems are placed back in the box.
Mecatol Rex is placed in the middle of the table as
usual.
Before the galaxy is created (before placing any
Home Systems), each player is randomly assigned a
number 1 through 5 (using paper, dice, or any other

matching the illustration found on the “Galaxy Setup
for 3, 4, and 5 Players” diagram.

Galaxy Setup for 3, 4, and 5 Players

After the entire galaxy has been completed, reveal the
face down system that was placed adjacent to Mecatol
Rex.
Due to the nature of 5 players in a hexagon-derived
board, some players will be closer to each other than
others. To compensate for this, players in position 1
and 4 receive four Trade Goods before the game
begins (placing them on their Race Sheets), and the
player in position 5 receives six Trade Goods before
the game begins (placing them on his Race Sheet).

STRATEGY CARDS IN THE FIVE PLAYER GAME
The five player game uses the same rules for choosing
Strategy Cards as in the normal six player game.

3 Player Setup

4 Player Setup

Unlike the 6 player game, however, there will be three
remaining unselected Strategy Cards. Place a bonus
token on each unselected Strategy Card, thus placing
a total of three bonus tokens every round instead of
two.

GAME OPTION:
THE LONG WAR
Some players may find the path to 10 victory points
too brief. Such players may desire a more definitive,
longer, and more epic experience.
You can create this experience by using the optional
side of the Victory Point Track, which goes to 14 victory points rather than 10.
In addition, when preparing the Public Objective
Deck, randomly select 5 Stage II Public Objective
Cards (instead of 3) in addition to the “Game Over
Card”, and 8 Stage I Public Objective Cards (instead
of 6), creating a Public Objective Deck of 14 cards
(instead of 10).

5 Player Setup

method of randomization). That number assigns each
player’s position as indicated on the 5 player setup
illustration on the “Galaxy Setup for 3, 4, and 5
Players” diagram.
The first player shuffles the remaining 32 systems,
removing one random system, placing it back in the
box without looking at it. The first player then places

another single random system face down next to
Mecatol Rex in a position of his choice.
Then he deals the remaining 30 systems to the players
(with each player receiving 6 systems each.)
Players now create the galaxy as normal, with the
final board constellation and Home System placement
Page 32

Alternative Variant: By using the suggested Public
Objective Deck above, your game will end somewhere between turn 9 and turn 14. If so desired, you
can simply omit the “Game Over” card from the
Objective Deck. If you do so, you should end the
game after the Status phase in which the last Public
Objective Card was drawn.

GAME OPTION:
AGE OF EMPIRE

GAME OPTION:
DISTANT SUNS

The victory point system of TI, as written, rewards
players that seek a balance of planning and flexibility.
Some players, however, may desire that the victory
objectives of TI be more predictable (which was the
case in the two previous editions of TI) so that they
may form a more stable long term strategy. This is
accomplished in the following way:
After creating the Public Objective Deck as normal,
start to draw its cards, starting from the top. After
drawing a card, place it face up in the common play
area, creating a straight line of cards starting to the
left. After drawing and placing the “Game Over” card,
if there are any additional cards remaining in the
deck, place those cards back in the box (you will not
need them).
Now you should have a line of Public Objective Cards
somewhere between 7 and 10 cards long with the
“Game Over” card in the rightmost position.
During the game, players may qualify for the victory
points of any of the revealed Objective Cards from
Turn one. No further Public Objective Cards will
enter the game. In this way, players know exactly
which objectives will give them victory points for the
duration of the game.
After the end of the Status Phase of the first game
round, place a Turn token (a glass bead, a thimble, a
quarter, etc.) on the leftmost card. After every Status
Phase is finished, move the Turn token one card to
the right. When the Turn token moves onto the Game
Over card, the game ends immediately, and the player
with the highest number of victory points is the winner (as described in the core rules). In this way, your
row of Objective Cards also act as a Turn track.

Included in the game, you will find the octagonshaped “Domain” counters that form the core of the
“Distant Suns” game option. Using Domain Counters
dramatically alters the strategy and flavor during the
early turns of TI, as they simulate the dangers and
rewards of space exploration and colonization.
After the game board has been created, but before the
game begins, randomize the Domain Counters and
place one Domain Counter face down on every neutral planet on the board (do not place Domain
Counters on any Home System planets or on Mecatol
Rex). Place excess Domain Counters back in the box
without looking at them.

THE DOMAIN COUNTERS
Domain Counters reflect the unknown aspects of
deep-space exploration and colonization, functioning
as follows:
• A planet’s Domain Counter is revealed (and its
effects resolved) immediately after a player has landed all his desired Ground Forces there during the
“Planetary Landings” step of a Tactical Action.
After a Domain Counter has been revealed, the active
player may not land additional Ground Force units on
the planet during the same activation.
• When revealed, the symbol on the front of the
Domain Counter represents the encounter/event of the
planet. Immediately resolve the effects of that event.
On the back of this rules booklet, you will find a
detailed description of every Domain Counter effect.
• If a player comes to control a planet without actually
landing forces there during a Tactical Action, the
Domain Counter is ignored and placed back in the
box with no effect.
• If, for any reason, a planet returns to neutrality after
being occupied by a player, do not place a new
Domain Counter on the planet.

Page 33

PROBING
Immediately after the movement step of a Tactical
Action (not a Transfer Action) the active player may
choose to probe Domain Counters in the activated
system as long as he has at least one Fighter unit in
the system.
If probing, the player may secretly look at every face
down Domain Counter in the system. After looking,
he must return the Domain Counters face down to
their respective planets. The player may not look at
the counters again, unless he probes once more during
a future activation, or lands Ground Forces on the
planet.
A player may not land Ground Forces on a planet during the same activation in which he probed the planet.
SPECIAL RULE: If the Domain Counter “Lazax
Survivors” is probed, remove the counter from the
game. The probing player immediately receives one
victory point and may immediately draw 3 action
cards.

RAZING
During the Invasion Combat segment of a Tactical
Action, a War Sun or Dreadnought in the same system
as a Domain Counter may choose to raze a face down
Domain Counter. The active player simply announces
that he is razing the planet, then he removes the
Domain Counter and returns it to the box without
applying its effects.
A War Sun or Dreadnought may not raze a Domain
Counter that has already been revealed.
Note that a single War Sun or Dreadnought may only
raze one Domain Counter in its system. If a player wishes to
raze two Domain
Counters in the same
system during the
same activation,
he must have at
least two Dreadnoughts/War
Suns in the system.
A War Sun or
Dreadnought
that has been
used (or will
be used) for
razing after
the movement

step may not be used for bombardment during the
same activation.
After razing a planet, a controversial act, the player
may face adverse reactions from his own people and
the Galactic Council. After razing a Domain Counter,
the player should roll the dice and consult the table
below.
Result

Effects

1-7

No Effect

8-9

Lose 3 random Action Cards

0

Lose 3 random Action Cards and
immediately exhaust all his
ready planets.

SPECIAL RULE: If a player razes the “Lazax
Survivors” Domain Counter, he must immediately discard all of his Action Cards, exhaust all of his planets,
and lose all of his Trade Goods. In addition, that player may not vote on the next Political Agenda.

GAME OPTION:
LEADERS

A Leader is not allowed to land on a neutral or hostile
planet unless accompanied by at least one Ground
Force unit.
If a Leader is part of an Invasion Combat on an
enemy (or Neutral planet, if using the Distant Suns
option) the Leader will be automatically CAPTURED
should the invasion fail against another players planet
(or KILLED if the Invasion Combat fails against a
neutral planet).

KILLING AND CAPTURING LEADERS
Leaders are powerful assets, and your opponents
would like nothing better than to capture or eliminate
these individuals.
In space
If a ship carrying a Leader is destroyed during a
Space Battle, roll a die.
On a result of 1-5, the leader is KILLED and permanently removed from play. On a result of 6-8, the
Leader escapes and its owner may immediately place
the Leader on any friendly planet (not under blockade). On a result of 9-10, the Leader is CAPTURED
by the opposing player in the Space Battle (see
below).
If a ship is destroyed any time other than during a
Space Battle, the Leader is automatically killed and
removed from play.
On a planet
If a planet containing a Leader is successfully invaded
by an enemy player, roll a die.

Included in the game, you will find 30 Leader counters (3 for each race). These represent exceptional personalities that will assist their race in its struggle to
attain the imperial throne.
There are five different types of Leaders: Generals,
Admirals, Diplomats, Agents, and Scientists.

PLACING LEADERS
When using this game option, all three of a race’s
Leaders are placed in their player’s Home System
before the game begins just like the normal starting
units. Like Ground Forces and PDS, a Leader is
always considered to be on a planet, or being transported by a ship.
Unlike Ground Forces and PDS, however, any spaceship (including Fighters) may transport one or more
Leaders using the same rules as Carriers transporting
Ground Force units. Leaders do not count towards the
capacity of any ship.

On a result of 1-5 the Leader is CAPTURED. On a
result of 6-9 the Leader escapes and its owner may
immediately place the leader on any friendly planet
(not under blockade). On a result of 10, the Leader is
killed and removed from the game.
If a Leader is present on a planet whose ownership
changes for any other reason than invasion, the
Leader automatically escapes and may be placed on
any friendly planet.
Leaders can never exist on neutral or enemy planets,
nor in space by themselves.

CAPTIVE LEADERS
When capturing a Leader, the capturing player (the
“captor”) places the captured Leader in his playing
area. During the Status Phase, a captor may freely
transfer the captive to another player, including the
owner of the Leader (in which case the Leader is
Page 34

FREED and immediately placed on any friendly planet not under blockade, of its owner’s choice). Instead
of transferring the prisoner, the captor may choose to
keep the prisoner another round, or execute the prisoner. If choosing the latter, the captor announces the
execution and removes the said leader from play.

RESCUING A CAPTIVE LEADER
Every time a planet is successfully invaded, if the
planet was controlled by a player holding any captive
Leaders, roll a die after a successful invasion. If the
result is a 9 or 10, a captive leader has been found by
the invader. If more than one prisoner is held by the
losing player, the invader may choose which of the
captive Leaders to rescue. If the rescued Leader
belongs to another race, the invader is now its new
captor, and must choose what to do with the new captive during the next Status Phase. If the rescued
Leader belongs to the invader, the Leader is immediately placed on any friendly planet (not under blockade) of the invader’s choice.
If a player successfully invades the last planet of
another player, all captive Leaders held by the eliminated player are transferred to the invader.

LEADER ABILITIES.
The abilities of a Leader depends on the Leader type.
The 5 different Leader types and abilities are
described in detail below:

Scientist
• A planet that contains a technology specialty and at
least one Scientist provides a technology discount of 2
credits rather than 1.
• A planet with at least one Scientist may build a new
Space Dock at a cost of 2 rather than 4.
• PDS units on a planet with at least one Scientist
receive +1 on all rolls.
• Planets with at least one Scientist and one PDS unit
may not be bombarded by a War Sun unit (a War Sun
can normally ignore the planetary shield provided by
a PDS.)

Diplomat
• If a Diplomat is present on a planet about to be
invaded by enemy Ground Forces during the
Planetary Invasion step, the Diplomat may delay the
invasion by one round. Simply return the enemy
Ground Force units to their Carrier(s). A planet protected by a Diplomat may not be protected again by a
Diplomat for the remainder of the round, or for the
next game round.
• A fleet that contains at least one Diplomat may
move through systems containing an opponent’s ships,
but only if the opponent grants his permission for the
transit.

General
• When a General participates as the attacker in an
Invasion Combat (by landing with the invading
Ground Forces) the active player may re-roll up to
two dice during every round of that Invasion Combat.
• Dreadnoughts and War Suns receive -4 to bombardment rolls against a planet that contains at least one
General.
• All defending Ground Forces on a planet that contains at least one General receive +1 to their combat
rolls during Invasion Combat.

Admiral
• When an Admiral participates in a Space Battle (as
attacker or defender), its owner may roll one additional die for the ship that is carrying the Admiral.
(Note that only one additional die is rolled, even if the
Admiral is on a War Sun.)
• A Dreadnought carrying an Admiral receives +1
movement.
• When attacked by a fleet containing an Admiral, a
defending fleet may not retreat unless the defending
fleet also contains an Admiral.

Agent
• If an Agent is part of an Invasion Combat as an
attacker (by landing on the enemy planet with one or
more friendly Ground Forces), enemy PDS may not
fire at the invading Ground Forces.
• If an Agent is part of a successful Invasion Combat
as an attacker (by landing on the enemy planet with
one or more friendly Ground Forces), the active player may replace any enemy PDS and Space Dock on
the planet with his own similar units (normally these
units would be destroyed).
• An Agent may be sacrificed at any time to act as a
“Sabotage” action card. Simply announce the action
after another player plays an Action Card, cancelling
its effects. Then discard both the Action Card and the
Agent.

GAME OPTION:
SABOTAGE RUNS

ted, the sabotage run is executed over two rounds
of die rolls.
1) The Outer Defenses
Roll a die for every Fighter committed to the sabotage run. On an unmodified result of 9 or 10, the
Fighter makes it through the outer defenses of the
War Sun. All other results destroy the Fighter unit,
which receives no return fire.
2) The Inner Defenses
For every Fighter unit that made it past the outer
defenses of the War Sun, roll another die (one at a
time). If the fighter rolls an unmodified result of 10,
the sabotage run is successful and the War Sun is
immediately destroyed. Such a destroyed War Sun
receives no return fire. All other die results instantly destroy the Fighter unit, which receives no return
fire.
Surviving Fighter units are able to participate in the
subsequent Space Battle. An unharmed War Sun is
able to participate in the Space Battle with no ill
effects.

Although the mighty War Sun unit is the undisputed king of space, history has shown that such
hubris of creation often hides a fatal flaw that can
be exploited by the smallest of spacecraft.

Should an opponent have two War Sun units, a
player is allowed to make a sabotage run against
both units by dividing his committed Fighters into
two separate pools. With each of these pools attacking one specific War Sun, simply resolve each separate sabotage run, one at a time.

When using this game option, Fighter units have a
desperate chance of a pre-Space Battle strike at an
enemy War Sun in the contested system. This desperate attack is called the “sabotage run.”

Problems,
Questions and Support

ANNOUNCE THE RUN
A sabotage run takes place before an actual Space
Battle begins, immediately after any Destroyer
Anti-Fighter Barrage.
Both players (attacker first) may announce that they
are making a Sabotage run against an enemy War
Sun in the battle (if no War Sun is present among
the enemy units, a player cannot undertake a sabotage run).
If both players have War Suns, the attacker should
resolve his sabotage run first, followed by the
defender.
After announcing a sabotage run, a player must
commit a number of Fighter units to the dangerous
task. After a number of Fighters have been commitPage 35

For online community, FAQ, customer service, and
additional information on TWILIGHT IMPERIUM,
please visit:

WWW.FANTASYFLIGHTGAMES.COM

Credits
Game Design (all editions): Christian T. Petersen
Additional Development (3rd edition): Greg
Benage
Rules: Christian T. Petersen
Editing: Greg Benage
Graphic Design: Brian S. Schomburg
Cover Artwork: Scott Schomburg

Leader Tokens Artwork: Brian Schomburg, Scott
Schomburg, Tyler Walpole
Fiction and Twilight Imperium Universe:
Christian T. Petersen
Production Administration: Darrell Hardy
Publisher: Christian T. Petersen

Strategy Card Summary

1st Edition Creative Input: Morten Nyhus Hornsleth
and Peter Mork.
2nd Edition Creative Input: Jeffery P. BoucherZamso and Darrell Hardy
1st Edition Playtesting: W. Gregory Klett, Gerald L
Ogaard, Justin Bang, Gerald Dokka, Andrew
Fredlund, Anders M. & Thomas H. Petersen, Joseph
Burke, Christopher Dorn, Morten Nyhus Hornsleth,
Leslie Nielsen, Mike, Peter, Andrew, Brian, Debbie,
Jason, Rich, Anton, and many other helpful gamers
at the (now long departed) Phoenix Games in
Burnsville.
2nd Edition Playtesting: Rusty Schmidt, Darrell
Hardy, Erik Tyrell, Jeffery P. Boucher-Zamso, and
Osta Productions.
3rd Edition Playtesting: Rob Vaughn, Thomas H.
Petersen, Scott Nicely, Brian S. Schomburg, Kevin
Wilson, Tim Sturm, Greg Benage, Tod Gelle, Darrell
Hardy, Mike Zebrowski, John Goodenough, Mike
Barton, Pete, Thor, Ewan, and Robert Jankovich.
TWILIGHT IMPERIUM is a trademark of Fantasy
Flight Publishing, Inc. Copyright 1997-2004 Fantasy
Flight Publishing, Inc. All Rights Reserved. The
products, or any parts thereof, may not be reproduced without the publisher's consent.

1. THE INITIATIVE STRATEGY

2. THE DIPLOMACY STRATEGY

The Initiative Strategy Card, unlike the other
Strategy Cards, does not give its owner the option of
taking a Strategic Action. It does, however, give its
owner the Speaker Token (which grants the first pick
of Strategy Cards during the next Strategy Phase)
and allows its owner to execute the Secondary
Ability of other Strategy Cards without spending a
Command Counter.

Choosing and executing a Diplomatic Strategy can
provide a key respite for a player about to be overrun by an aggressive neighbor. A Diplomatic
Strategy can also be used by an unscrupulous player
who first conquers territory from another player, and
then (as a later action) selects that player as the target of the primary ability.

A player may not select the Initiative Strategy Card
two rounds in a row.

By prohibiting the activation of each other's systems,
players are effectively barred from attacking each
other for the rest of the round. Players may, of
course, seek alternative ways to harm the other player, such as invading systems that do not contain
units, playing Action Cards, etc.
The secondary ability of the Diplomacy Strategy
Card allows players to refresh two Planet Cards
already exhausted earlier in the phase. This means
that a player could possibly use the resources or
influence of a Planet Card twice, or even use the
resources of a planet just invaded this phase (as all
Planet Cards are exhausted when first claimed by a
player).

Page 36

3. THE POLITICAL STRATEGY

4. THE LOGISTICS STRATEGY

5. THE TRADE STRATEGY

The Political Strategy Card provides its owner with a
generous allocation of Action Cards, an additional
Command Counter, and the ability to manipulate the
Political Deck by deciding which of the top three
Political Cards will be drawn by the next player to
execute the Primary Ability of the Political Strategy
Card.

As Command Counters are a vital component for a
player to manage his race, the Logistics Strategy Card
is an important and integral part of the game. Its primary ability is powerful as it allows the active player
to simply receive 4 Command Counters from his reinforcement pile and add them to his Race Sheet.

The Trade Strategy Card is the main vehicle for initiating trade agreements between players. By choosing
the “a“ option of the Primary Ability, the active player
will instantly profit by receiving three free Trade
Goods; he also receives Trade Goods for his own
trade agreements, and then allows all players (himself
included) to open new trade agreements with each
other. After two players have agreed to open a new
trade agreement, the active player must approve the
agreement, or it cannot be made. If he is so inclined,
this allows the active player to potentially collect
some handsome bribes. Note that the active player has
no power (unless executing option “b”) over already
existing trade agreements.

See the Political Card section on page 23 for how to
resolve the Political Card drawn by the active player.
The secondary ability of the Political Strategy simply
allows players to draw an extra Action Card.

The Secondary Ability of the Logistics Strategy Card
is the primary vehicle for other players to acquire
additional Command Counters. While executing the
secondary ability, a player must spend influence by
exhausting his Planet Cards. A player may take one
Command Counter for every three influence he
spends.
IMPORTANT SPECIAL RULE FOR THE
LOGISTICS STRATEGY: Unlike most other
Strategy Cards, players do not need to spend a
Command Counter from their command pool in
order to execute this Secondary Ability.

Instead of collecting wealth and facilitating new trade
agreements, the active player may choose option “b.”
If he does so, all existing trade agreements are immediately broken, and all Trade Cards are returned to
their owners (including trade agreements held by the
Hacan).
The Secondary Ability simply allows players to collect Trade Goods for their active trade agreements as
described on page 24.
Note: Players cannot collect Trade Goods for a
trade agreement just formed during the same
Action.

Page 37

6. THE WARFARE STRATEGY
The Warfare Strategy Card's Primary Ability is both
extremely flexible and powerful as it gives the active
player a plurality of tactical options, such as activating a system twice, or moving a fleet twice, etc.
The Secondary Ability can be very useful under the
right circumstances. It allows a player to move up to
two Cruiser/Destroyer units (from the same or different systems) to adjacent empty systems (see the definition of an empty system on page 25). These units
may move even if their current system is activated
(which normally prohibits any movement). Although
the destination systems become activated, the
Command Counters used for these activations come
from your reinforcements and not from your Race
Sheet.
The ships are allowed to move into an already activated empty system(s), in which case no Command
Counter is placed in the system.
Note that a player executing the Secondary Ability is
allowed to move the two Destroyer/Cruiser units into
two different systems, or into the same system. The
ships must move into an adjacent system (and no farther) regardless of the movement rate of the units.

7. THE TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY

8. THE IMPERIAL STRATEGY

The Technology Strategy is the primary avenue for
players to gain access to the exciting and helpful
Technology Cards found in each player's Technology
Deck. The primary ability of the Technology Strategy
gives the active player a free technology advance of
his choice. The active player simply takes a
Technology Card from his Technology Deck and
places the card face up in his play area. He can now
enjoy the benefits of this Technology advance.

The Primary Ability of the Imperial Strategy Card
reveals a Public Objective Card to the common play
area, and then provides 2 victory points for the active
player.

IMPORTANT: As noted on page 24, a Technology
Card can only be acquired if its player has already
acquired its prerequisite technologies (as stated on
each Technology Card).

The secondary ability allows a player to produce units
in system he has already activated or build units in a
unactivated system without activating it. This is a
powerful ability, as a player could potentially build
units in system twice, or build units in an unactivated
system, allowing those new units to move during a
later Tactical/Transfer Action of the same game round.

The Secondary Ability allows a player to purchase a
Technology advance from his Technology Deck. A
player must spend 8 resources to take a Technology
Card from his Technology Deck and place it face up
in his play area (subject to owning the prerequisite
technologies, if any).

Since movement is prohibited through a system containing one or more enemy ships (except for Fighters),
a lone patrolling Destroyer or Cruiser can effectively
act as barrier against a deep strike by a fast enemy
fleet.
Page 38

Should the active player draw the “Game Over”
Public Objective Card, the game ends immediatelyeven before the active player receives his two victory
points.

Index
action cards
action cards, sabotage
action phase
actions
activated
activation
activation sequence
active player
agenda
anti-fighter barrage
asteroid fields
bombardment
bonus counters
capacity
capacity, fighter
carrier transport
carriers
casualties
command areas
command counters
command pool area
components, overview
control markers
cost, paying
cruisers
damage
destroyers
diplomacy strategy
distant suns
domain counters
dreadnoughts
enemy
exhausting planets
fighters
first player
five-player game
fleet
fleet supply area
four-player game
friendly
Galactic Council
game round
ground forces
home systems
imperial strategy
Imperium Rex
influence, spending
initiative strategy
invasion
invasion combat
invasion defense
laws
Lazax survivors
Leaders
logistics strategy
map hexes
merchants guild

5, 15, 22
22
7
9
11
10
10
9
5, 23
30
18
30
5, 9
29
29
27
28
16
15
5,15, 20
21
4-6
5
22
29
30
30
36
33
33
30
10
21
29
6
31
12
21
31
10
23
7
27
18
38
14
21
36
12
12, 17
29
23
33-34
34
37
4
25

movement, ships
nebulas
objective cards
objective cards, public
objective cards, secret
order of play
passing
PDS
PDS fire
phases
planet cards
planet cards, receiving
planet cards, refresh
planetary landings
planetary shield
planets
planets, exhausting
plastic units
player actions
player turns
political cards
political strategy
primary ability
probing
produce units
production
public objective cards
race sheet
races
razing
refresh
regular systems
reinforcement area
reinforcements
repair
resources, spending
retreats
round
sabotage
sabotage run
scuttling
secondary ability
secret objective cards
sequence, activation
sequence, status
sequence, transfer
ships, movement
space battle
space cannon
space dock
speaker token
special systems
status phase
status sequence
strategic action
strategy allocation area
strategy card

11
18
26
7
7
7, 11
14
29
11, 17, 28
7
4, 15
17
15
12
29
19
21
4
9
9
5, 23
37
9
33
12
14
5, 7, 14, 26
20
17
33
15
18
4
4, 6, 12
15
21
15
7
22
35
19
9
5, 7, 14, 26
10
14
12
11
12, 15
29
26
6
18
7, 14
14
9, 14
21
5, 7, 11, 15

Page 39

strategy, diplomacy
strategy, imperial
strategy, initiative
strategy, logistics
strategy, political
strategy, technology
strategy, trade
strategy, warfare
supernovas
supplement tokens, fighter
supplement tokens, ground force
systems
systems, empty
systems, regular
tactical action
technology advances
technology cards
technology specialties
technology strategy
technology tree
three-player game
trade agreements
trade agreements, breaking
trade cards
trade contracts
trade good counters5, 25
trade strategy
trade supply
trade value
transfer action
transfer sequence
turns
units
units, building
units, carrier
units, cruiser
units, destroyer
units, dreadnought 30
units, fighter
units, ground forces
units, limitations
units, PDS
units, scuttling
units, war sun
victory point track
votes, elect
votes, for/against
voting
war suns
warfare strategy
winning
withdrawals
wormholes

36
38
36
37
37
38
37
37
18
6, 19
6, 19
4
25
18
10
24
4
24
38
42-43
31
24
25
5, 24
24
37
6
5, 25
12
12
9
4
26
28
29
30
29
27
18
29
19
30
6
23
23
23
30
38
14
15
18

DESIGNER NOTES
It started in May 1997. After much toil and many financial woes, my fledgling
publishing company (Fantasy Flight Games "FFG") finally managed to publish
the first edition of Twilight Imperium ("TI"). In retrospect it turned out to be a
perfect period in which to publish a new board game. Although it did not occur
to me then, this was the dry time between the almost non-existent publication
schedule of the fading Avalon Hill, and still a few years before the invasion of
the magnificent "German style" games in the U.S.
The first edition of TI, which also was FFG's inaugural game publication, was a
fair success, selling through two print runs and several expansions over the next
few years. This success was a defining moment for FFG, as it set the course and
direction of where the company is today.
In late 1999, TI sold out of its second printing, and its expansions were all nearly
gone as well. At that time, our "Diskwars" game had become a big success, stabilizing the company and allowing me to consider a rework and improvement of TI
itself. After years of playing TI and listening to feedback from players, I felt that
improvements in game length, balance, and components could be made and
would be appreciated.
After a period of redesign and playtesting, FFG released Twilight Imperium
Second Edition in the late fall of 2000. The graphical presentation, components,
and design had all been dramatically improved. After a successful launch of the
main game, we published the expansion "Hope's End" in the summer of 2001.
Over this period, it was fun to see a community of TI players and fans starting to
emerge. Especially satisfying for me was the fact that many players had taken a
genuine liking to the history and races that I had created for the game.
Throughout this time, FFG kept growing, kept evolving, and kept developing and
improving its manufacturing knowledge and standards. With the success of
"Diskwars" and our d20 role-playing games, FFG had started to move away from
"big box" board games in order to concentrate on smaller games such as Tom
Jolly's Drakon, Reiner Knizia's Kingdoms, and Bruno Faidutti's Citadels.
The hobby games market was now in the middle of the German board game
invasion. Wonderful board games such as The Settlers of Catan, Formula De,
Lost Cities and many others were being discovered and devoured by the board
game enthusiasts. The more simulation-oriented "old school" U.S. board games
were no longer in vogue, and by many dismissed as dinosaurs in a new age of
board games. Although a little harsh, there nevertheless was good reason for the
argument. The German board games brought with them a simplicity and elegance
that was capable of producing a rewarding game experience with little player
down-time. The quality of the German game components was incredible; thick
cardboard, linen paper, color rules, and "lay-flat" game boards. Most games had
short playing times, lasting less than an hour, allowing players to enjoy two or
more games in a single evening.
After a few years, as the German board game style was slowly being taken for
granted and the romance with them no longer as new and exciting, some interesting undercurrents arose among the player communities. Although brilliant in
mechanics and elegance, the themes of the German games were often thin. Some

players started to notice that the sense of immersion was not as rewarding as the
games of the "old school" past.
Before TI 2nd edition sold out in the early spring of 2003, I had again started to
think about the future of "big box" board games for FFG. Truly inspired by the
German game designs, I began to develop an entirely new personal approach to
game design. I felt that it would be possible to merge the flavor of "old school"
U.S. games with the German design principles. Personally, I felt that my design
capability had matured significantly over the preceding few years, and that I was
at a place where I was able to execute this vision with some effect.
FFG published my "A Game of Thrones" board game (based on the fantastic
series of books by George RR Martin) in the fall of 2003. Encouraged by its
immediate success and its positive critical reception, I turned my attention back
to TI, which had been growing in my mind for many months.
At this point, FFG was in an entirely different situation than where we had been
before publishing either of the two first editions of TI. Our manufacturing capabilities, our graphics capabilities, and our market reach had expanded and grown.
As FFG now seemed capable of producing the version of TI that I had always
dreamed of, I felt ready to tackle a TI remake. It is possible that FFG could simply have reprinted TI with some nicer pieces and artwork, but I was interested in
truly moving the TI experience and system to a whole new level.
After inviting the TI community to make suggestions, and after a great deal of
thought, I dug into the design during the spring of 2004. At first, the progress
was slow. Not only did the CEO duties of FFG often distract me from the creative process, but the design goals I wanted to achieve were quite ambitious.
These design goals included:
1) To increase player participation. (Like most hobby games of their time, TI and
TI2 were dominated by a single-player phase resolution, resulting in a lot of
down-time for non-active players),
2) To reduce the game time,
3) To reduce player tendency/incentive to “turtle” (or stall) the game while
amassing enormous fleets, and
4) To bring the game fluidly together in a more cohesive whole.
My fundamental answer was TI3's "Command System." This simple resource
allocation mechanic allowed me to simulate interlacing board movement and, by
using the same resource, to define fleet size limits. By splitting the player turn
into Command Counter based single actions, most of the player downtime was
removed, fleets where reduced, and almost everything fell into place. Not only
did the Command System fix most of my concerns on the higher level of game
play, but it dramatically changed the tactical part of the game play into something that I had always wanted. Rather than facing grand-strategic big-fleet "you
blinked first" tactics that would often dominate the previous editions, the new
design of single "activations" suddenly made tactical timing important and tactical reaction possible.

Page 40

The Command System provided an almost "simultaneous" staggered movement, enhancing realism
and excitement. In TI3, as a player takes his turn, he hopefully will no longer perceive the game
board as static and frozen, but consider it in a new light; reactive, unpredictable, and alive.
Although the Command System solved most of my goals, I still needed to simplify the phase structure to streamline the game flow. Improving the tactics was not enough; it was important that TI kept
the flavor that made it unique, such as retaining the political cards and interstellar trade. For this, I
have relied on one of the most exciting developments and innovations in the "German" school of
game design.
The Strategy Card mechanic of TI3 originates from an inspired evolution within German board
games. From the small but clever Verrater by Marcel-André Casasola Merkle, to Citadels by Bruno
Faidutti, a development had begun that, in my opinion, will change the board games of the future.
The principle innovation of these games was that the typical "Phases" were greatly simplified, with
the core game engagement now tied elegantly to components (in Citadel’s case, the Character Cards)
rather than a heavy list of phases. Wolfgang Kramer also touched on this evolution in a different way,
with the magnificent El Grande. In El Grande the essential component, the action cards, do not simulate phases as in Citadels, but prod players forward by having them choose specific strategies in a
perfect-information environment. The engaging Vinci by Philippe Keyaerts introduced the wonderful
"increasing value" system that provided balance to unselected abilities by increasing their value every
turn until selected. Andreas Seyfarth took this evolution a step further as he combined the above elements (as well as adding his own innovation) in the wonderfully crafted and popular Puerto Rico.
Puerto Rico merged the dynamic phases (Verrater, Citadels), perfect information selection strategy
(El Grande), and the increasing value mechanic (Vinci) of its illustrious predecessors.
This series of brilliant developments provided me with the tools needed to break free of the stagnant
linear phase structures that have dominated our simulation games of the past.
In TI, the "Strategy Cards" use and build upon these wonderful innovations. With the Strategy Card
being executed as a part of the TI action phase, I could introduce the necessary "Phase" blocks seamlessly into the game flow. Not only did this allow me to retain the TI flavor, but weave the mechanic
into the game in a way that smoothly integrated with the Command System.
I think that the end result is quite exciting. Although players will be the final judges of whether I
have succeeded in my goals or not, I am hopeful that this version of TI will stand up to its rivals in a
period of innovative board game design.
I hope that you will enjoy this version of TI.
Best Wishes,
Christian T. Petersen
Pax Magnifica!

Page 41

TECHNOLOGY ADVANCEMENT TREE

Page 42

Page 43

Domain Effects (Distant Suns Option)
BIOHAZARD

WORMHOLE DISCOVERY

The hostile environment of this planet
requires terraforming. The first Ground
Force unit to land here is always eliminated while this token remains. The
first player to successfully invade this
planet may remove this counter.

A new wormhole has been discovered
in the system near this planet. Place this
counter in the middle of the system to
indicate the presence of the wormhole.
This wormhole will connect to its
brethren (alpha or beta) following the
normal rules for wormholes.

RADIATION

TECHNOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The planet contains unexpected high
levels of radiation. Kill all the Ground
Forces of the initial landing, then
remove this counter.

The player to your left must search
through your Technology deck and give
you a free technology advance for
which you have the necessary prerequisites. Then discard this counter.

HOSTILE LOCALS

NATURAL WEALTH

The local population will not be subdued. The indicated number of local
Ground Forces will fight any invader
(allow another player to roll their combat dice). If an invasion attempt fails,
the locals return to their full indicated
strength. May not be bombarded.
Discard after a successful invasion.

This planet has resources available for
immediate exploitation. Receive the
number of Trade Goods indicated, if
able. Then discard this counter.

Lazax Survivors

FOR

INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY

A discovery of ancient prophecy. You
may take this counter to receive 3 additional votes towards all future political
agendas. (See additional functions for
the Lazax survivors on page 42-43).

An industrious and friendly populace
welcomes you. You may immediately
place a free Space Dock here. The
Planet card for this planet is not
exhausted when you receive it. Discard
this counter.

SETTLERS

PEACEFUL

Return all of your Ground Forces to
their Carrier/War Sun. Roll a die. On a
result of 6+, place two free Ground
Forces on the planet from your reinforcements. On a roll of 1-5, determine
a random opponent. That opponent
places two free Ground Forces from his
reinforcements on the planet. Then discard this counter.

The landing proceeds without incident.
Discard this counter.

ANNEXATION

MORE INFORMATION AND PRODUCT SUPPORT, VISIT:

WWW.FANTASYFLIGHTGAMES.COM
Page 44

The Planets of
TWILIGHT IMPERIUM

Planet
Name

Technology
Specialty

Resources

Influence

The real points of interest in the TI galaxy are its
planets. Each planet is printed with its resource
value, influence value, and possibly a technology specialty. When a player successfully invades
a planet (neutral or enemy), he immediately
claims its corresponding Planet Card.
Resources represent a planet's economic surplus,
which can be used by its owner to purchase units
and technology.
Influence represents a planet's population, knowledge base, and/or political importance. Influence
is used to acquire Command Counters, to play
certain Action Cards, and to provide vital votes at
the Galactic Council.
Technology specialties represent a certain local
knowledge or a natural resource important to a
specific area of science. This provides the owner
of the planet with a discount resource towards
purchasing advances of that technology type.

FANTASY FLIGHT GAMES
1975 West Cty. Rd. B2 • Roseville • MN • 55113 •U.S.A
www.fantasyflightgames.com • ffg@fantasyflightgames.com

