In Vinhos (a Portuguese word meaning “Wines”) you will play
the role of wine producers in Portugal.
You must demonstrate your skills by promoting your label,
building a good reputation and gaining prestige at home and
abroad.
Over a period of 6 years, you will expand your business by
establishing Estates in the different regions of Portugal, buying
vineyards and building wineries.
Skilled enologists will help you increase the quality of your wine,
while top Wine Experts will enhance the taste, aroma, look and
alcohol content of your wine at the “Feira Nacional do Vinho
Português”, the Wine Tasting Fair.
Every year begins with a forecast of climatic conditions and ends
with the production of wine.
With the right weather conditions, exceptional vintages let you
produce high quality wines, while cloudy weather or heavy rain
usually have devastating effects: expanding your Estates is then
the only way to offset the negative effects.
The value of your wine increases with the passage of time, but
only if you have built an appropriate cellar to age it.
Selling your wines to Portuguese local hangouts, such as the
Casa de Fados, the Hotel and the Enoteca, will establish a
market presence for your company and will help you secure

the funds to expand your company, and to pay your enologists’
salaries.
But, as everyone knows, prestige cannot come from money alone.
To ensure a good reputation on international markets you must
meet the requirements of various Countries, by consistently
exporting high-quality wines.
Periodically, a Wine Tasting Fair will be held.
The choice of the best wine by value and features is essential to
the prestige of your company and will definitely make all the
difference!
Three influential managers, fond of wines and keenly interested
in the ones that will be presented at the fair, will offer you some
benefits, but only if your wine will fully meet their demands.
It is up to you to decide the best time to announce which wine
you intend to present at the Fair.
An early announcement will allow you to take advantage of the
benefits immediately; however, if you wait until the last moment,
chances are that you will present a wine of superior value, and
at the same time you will know for sure which features will be
most appreciated.

The winner is the Player with the most Victory Points at the end of the game.

Components
Before the start of the first game please remove all Bank Notes, Feature
Markers and Vintage, Cellar, Winery, Vineyard, Wine, Fair, Port Wine
and Wine Expert Tiles from the frames.

1)	 1 Game Board

Front

Back

10)	36 Bank Notes (6 by 5,000 Bagos,
12 by 2,000 Bagos and 18 by 1,000
Bagos)
11)	1 Round/Taxation Marker (natural color cylinder)

2)	 4 Player Boards

12)	8 Enologists (natural color pawns)

3)	 9 Vintage Tiles

13)	4 Action Markers (cylinders in the 4
Players colors:1 yellow, 1 red, 1 blue, 1
purple)

4)	 96 Wine Tiles

Red wine
side

White wine
side

5)	 16 Winery Tiles
6)	 32 Vineyard Tiles

Cost
side

Region
Side

14)	32 Barrels in the 4 Player colors (8
yellow, 8 red, 8 blue, 8 purple)
15)	36 Discs in the 4 Player colors (9 yellow, 9 red, 9 blue 9 purple)
16)	15 Region Renown Cubes (natural color)

7)	 9 Cellar Tiles
8)	 6 Port Wine Tiles
9)	 24 Wine Expert Tiles

17)	4 Feature Markers
Front

Back

Taste

Aroma

18)	12 Fair Tiles in the
4 Player colors (3 yellow, 3 red, 3 blue, 3
purple)

Look

Alcohol
Content

Initial Pr
The picture represents the initial set up for a 4-Player game.

1. Lay the Game Board on the table.
2. Each Player chooses a color (yellow, red, purple or

blue) and sets the following items in front of himself (*),
in order to create his supply:
•	 8 Barrels of the chosen color
•	 9 Discs of the chosen color
•	 1 Action Marker of the chosen color
•	 3 Fair Tiles of the chosen color
•	 1 Player Board
Each Player Board depicts:
4 Estates (each having 3
Estate slots) and
4 corresponding Warehouses (each having 2 slots).

If the game has fewer than 4 Players, put any unused components and leftover
Player Boards in the game box.

Victory Points

3. Each Player places his Scoring Marker (1 of his discs) on «0» (zero) on the

Scoring Track.
During the game, every time the Player earns Victory Points, he will advance his
Scoring Marker accordingly.
If a VP symbol on the game board is ivory, the Player will earn those Victory
Points at the end of the game.

Estate
Warehouse

Vineyards and
Region Renown Cubes

12.1 Place Region Renown cubes on the Board to form a
common supply.

12.2 Divide the Vineyard Tiles depending on the upper

left number (that indicates the Vineyard’s region), form
8 decks, shuffle each one of them, and place them in the
appropriate region spaces with the Cost Side face up.
Place Port Wine Tiles in the Douro space.
4 Players will play with 8 Regions, 3 Players with 7 Regions,
2 Players with 6 Regions. (With 2 or 3 Players, randomly
select the Region(s) to be discarded from the game and put
the unused Vineyard Tiles in the game box. Suggestion: for
the 1st play, with 3 Players remove the Algarve Tiles, with
2 Players remove Algarve and Setúbal Tiles).

Empty Cube Space
Region Circle

12.3

Each Player buys 1 Vineyard of his choice and
receives the matching Wine Tile.
Note: Each region has a different characteristic (you can find
their descriptions at the end of this rulebook).
The Player must:
a.	 choose 1 region,
b.	 take the topmost Vineyard Tile
from that region,
c.	 pay (in cash) the price shown on
its Cost Side,
d.	 place the chosen Vineyard Tile
with the Region Side facing up on his Player Board,
e.	 place 1 of his discs on the game board in the chosen
Region’s Circle on the map,
f.	 place 1 Region Renown Cube (from the common
supply) on the game board in an empty Cube Space of
the chosen Region’s box,
g.	 take a Wine Tile valued 2 (For
Lisboa and Douro Wine Tiles,
see the description of the
characteristics),
h.	 place it on his Player Board on the
leftmost Warehouse slot below
the Vineyard (For Dão, see the
description of the characteristics) with either the “Red
Wine” or the “White Wine” side face-up depending
on the color depicted on the upper-right corner of the
Vineyard Tile.
Note: more than 1 Player can choose the same region.

Sales Slots
Export Slots

Wine Experts, Cellars, Wineries
11.1 Divide the Wine Expert Tiles depending on the depicted feature (Taste,

Look, Aroma, or Alcohol Content), form 4 decks, shuffle each one of them
and place them face up in the appropriate spaces.
11.2 Put the Cellar Tiles on the board
(with 4 Players, use 9 Cellars; with 3 Players, 7 Cellars; with 2 Players, 5
Cellars. Put any leftover Cellars in the game box).
11.3 Put the Winery Tiles on the board
(with 4 Players, use 16 Wineries; with 3 Players, 12 Wineries; with 2 Players, 8
Wineries). Put any leftover Wineries in the game box.

eparation
Vintage Tiles and Player order

4.1 Set aside the «0» (zero) Vintage Tile. Shuffle remaining Vintage Tiles and

place them face-down as a deck on the appropriate space on the game board.
Place the 0 Tile face-up on top of the deck. The first Year’s Vintage Tile is
always the 0.
4.2 Randomly establish the initial order of play. Each Player places his Order
Marker (1 of his discs) on the top row of the Player Order area, accordingly.
Example: Red is First Player, Purple will play second, Blue third and
Yellow fourth.

Wine Tiles

5. Put the wine tiles next to the board to form
a common supply.

Wine Tasting Fair

At the Wine Tasting Fair (Feira Nacional do Vinho Português)
Players will earn Fair Points depending on the features (Taste,
Aroma, Look and Alcohol content) of the wines they present.

6.1 Place 1 Feature Marker on the leftmost space of each

row. During the game, the position of the Marker will
indicate the value of the Feature.

6.2
Managers
Area

Each Player places his Fair Scoring Marker (1 of
his discs) over this symbol on the FairScoring Track.
During the game, every time the Player earns
Fair Points, he will advance his Fair-Scoring
Marker accordingly.

Benefits
Area

Banco do Vinho and
Investment Bar

Each Player has a bank account open at Banco do Vinho
where he will be credited with earnings from the sales of
wine and which he will use to pay his enologists’ salaries. The
current account balance will increase or decrease according to
Investments made and relevant positive or negative interest.

Fair
Area

7. Each Player places
Investment
Bar

•	 his Bank Account Marker (1 of his discs) on space 5
of the Bank Account and
•	 his Investment Marker (1 of his discs) in the “+1”
space of the Investment Bar.
Whenever a Player’s bank account gains or loses money, he
moves his Bank Account Marker forward or back accordingly
(1 space = 1,000 Bagos). Whenever he invests or divests, he
moves his Investment Marker up or down accordingly.

Bank
Account

Bank Notes
8.

Enologists

9. Put the Enologists on the game board.

Actions Area and Round Track

10.1 Each Player places his Action Marker in the central space of the Actions

All purchases will be made in cash
(Bagos notes).
•	The first Player receives 11,000
Bagos
•	 The second Player receives 11,000 Bagos (12,000
Bagos in a 2-Player game)
•	 The third Player receives 12,000 Bagos
•	 The fourth Player receives 12,000 Bagos
Players put their Bagos in front of themselves to create their
own supply. Place the remaining money next to the game
board to form a common supply.

Area.

10.2 Place the Round/Taxation Marker in the space at the top left corner of
the Round Track.

(*) from now on, for simplicity, readability and economy, we will make use of the
pronoun «He» when talking about each Player, while it is clearly understood that we
indeed mean in each instance to say a more correct «he/she».

Game round
The game lasts 6 rounds, equivalent to 6 years.

1st Year

2nd Year 3rd Year

The Round/Taxation marker indicates the passing of
years and of different steps within each year.
During each round there are the following steps (always in the same order):

Start of Round

4th Year

Each Year begins with the weather forecast for the current year.

5th Year

6th Year

Taking Actions

Each Year, the Player will perform 2 Actions among
the 9 available.
He can buy Vineyards, build Wineries, hire Enologists,
build Cellars, sell or export the produced wines, manage the sales revenue, hire
Wine Experts, pass or announce which wine he intends to present at the following
Fair.
He can also take advantage of the benefits offered by the 3 Managers.

Available Actions:

Maintenance

The Players will calculate the positive or negative
interest on their Investments, and will pay their
enologists’ salaries.

Vineyards

Cellars

Wineries

Wine Experts

Pass/
Press Release

Enologists

Export

Sales

Bank

Example: Production Step

Production

Players will receive 1 Wine Tile for each Estate on their
Player Board where there is at least 1 Vineyard, and will
place it in the leftmost slot of the related Warehouse
		
or Cellar.
Every year, wines will move 1 slot to the right to indicate their aging.
The color of Wine depends on the color of Vineyard, while its Production Value
depends on the number of Vineyards, Wineries and Enologists in the Estate, and
on the weather conditions of the current year.

Red has produced a “3”
white wine. He places the
Tile in the leftmost slot of the
corresponding warehouse.

Warehouse Slot

Wine Tasting Fair
(only 3 rd, 5 th, and 6 th year)

Purple has produced a
“2” red wine.

At the end of the 3rd, 5th, and 6th year a Wine Tasting
Fair is held.
Each Player must present 1 wine, and only 1 wine, at each Fair.
The Wine Expert Tiles can be played to gain Fair Points. The higher the value
of the wine a Player presents, the higher the number of Tiles he can play.

Cellar

He places the Tile in the leftmost slot of the corresponding
cellar.

Start of round
At the beginning of each year except the 1st (the 1st Year starts with the
Taking Actions Step) Players must:
a.	 discard the previous year’s Vintage Tile, and flip the topmost Tile of
the Vintage deck face-up. The number in the bottom-left (from +2 to -2)
indicates the weather conditions of the current year. Weather conditions will
influence the production of wines at the end of the current year. The Vintage
Tile for the 1st year is the “0” Tile placed during the Initial Preparation. Every
game will play out differently depending on the sequence of vintages. Players will
need to give serious consideration to the weather while planning their strategies.
b.	 move the Feature markers to the right 1/2/3 spaces, as indicated on the
Vintage Tile. If a Feature Marker reaches the rightmost space, it cannot be
moved further. Note: during the game, the Feature Markers will never reset to
zero.
No Feature Marker will be moved at the beginning of the 1st Year.
At the beginning of 4th and 6th year, each Player that has any Wine
Expert Tiles face-down in front of him, turns them face-up.

4

Example: 4th year.
The Vintage Tile foretells a bad year (each
production will be worth 1 point less).
The feature Look will increase 3 times, and
Taste 2 times.
Move the Look
Marker 3 spaces to
the right and the
Taste Marker 2
spaces to the right.

The Yellow Player has 2 Wine Expert Tiles face-down in
front of him. He turns them face-up.

Taking Actions
This Step is made up of 2 Phases.
Phase 1:
Place the Round/Taxation Marker on space “1” of
the current year, to indicate that Phase 1 is starting.
Starting with the First Player and continuing in the order shown in the “Player
Order” area, each Player must:
a.	 move his Action Marker,
b.	 place it in the space depicting the Action he intends to perform and
c.	 take the corresponding Action.
movement rules:
•	 If the Player does not want to or cannot take any actions, he must move
his Action Marker to the Pass/Press Release space and
pass.
•	If the Player moves his Action Marker to an adjacent
space (orthogonally or diagonally), the movement is free
of charge.
If he moves his Action Marker to a non-adjacent
space, he must pay 1,000 Bagos (cash) to the common
supply.
Red can move his Action Marker free of charge to one of the spaces indicated
by the red arrows. Otherwise he has to pay 1,000 Bagos (cash) to the common
supply.
•	 The Player must pay 1,000 Bagos (cash) to each Player already on the
destination space, if any.
•	The Player must pay 1,000 Bagos (cash) to the common supply
if the Round/Taxation Marker is in the destination space.
If Red moves to this space, he has to pay 1,000 Bagos (cash) to
Purple and 1,000 Bagos (cash) to the common supply.
Note: You must always move to a different space. The Player can not, therefore,
perform the same Action twice in a row.
In order to place his Action Marker in one of the spaces, the Player must be able to
perform and pay for the associated Action and must have enough cash Bagos to pay
for non-adjacent movement, any opponents already on the destination space and any
taxes that need to be paid.
Exceptions:
◊	Moving the Action Marker to the Pass/Press Release space is always free
of charge, even if there are other Players’ Action Markers there;
◊	If his Action Marker is already in the Pass/Press Release space and the Player
is in no way able to take any other Action, then he can stay in the Pass/
Press Release space, without moving his Marker.
order of play:
If the Player places his Action Marker on the Pass/Press
Release space, he moves his Order Marker from the top
row to the bottom row of the “Player Order” Area and
places it in any empty Order Slot he chooses (only 1
Order Marker may occupy any single Order Slot).
Empty Order Slot
Phase 2:
Once all Players have made their first move, place the
Round/Taxation Marker in the adjacent space “2”,
to indicate that Phase 2 is starting.

If necessary, adjust the order of play maintaining the
positions of the Order Markers placed on the bottom
row. The Order Markers that are still on the top row are
shifted accordingly.

Example: 4th year, Taking
Actions Step, Phase 1. Players
put the Round/Taxation
Marker in space 1 of the 4th
Year.

Red (first Player) moves his Action Marker
from Export to Wine Experts.
The target space is adjacent to his original space,
so he does not have to pay to move; however,
the Round/Taxation Marker is currently on
Wine Experts, so he has to pay 1,000 Bagos to
the common supply. He takes the Wine Expert
Action.
Purple moves his Action Marker
from Enologists to Pass/Press
Release.
He wants to
go first, so he moves his Order Marker
to the first space on the bottom row.
He passes and does not take any
action.
Blue moves his Action Marker from Cellars to
Pass/Release.
He wants to go last, so he moves his Order
Marker to the last space on the bottom row.
He doesn’t pay anything
to Purple, because
the Pass/Press Release
action is always free of
charge. He takes the
Press Release Action.
Yellow moves his
Action Marker from
Bank to Wine Experts.
The target space is not
adjacent to his original
space.
Both Red’s Marker
and the Round/Taxation Marker are already on Wine Experts.
Yellow must then pay 2,000 Bagos to the common supply
and 1,000 Bagos to Red. He takes the Wine Expert Action.

The Round/Taxation Marker
is placed in the adjacent space
“2”.

Starting with the current First Player, and following
the order of play shown in the “Player Order” area, each Player must once
more (following the same rules of Phase 1) move his Action Marker, place
it in the space indicating the Action he intends to perform, and take the
corresponding Action.
At the end of Phase 2, if necessary, adjust the order of play again.

5

Phase 2 will have the following order of
play:
Purple, Red, Yellow, Blue.

Available actions:

Vineyards, Wineries, Enologists, Cellars,
Sales, Export, Bank, Wine Experts, Pass/Press Release
Note: all components are limited to the quantity provided and can therefore run out during the game.
The only exceptions are:
Bagos Notes - In the unlikely event that the common supply runs out of cash, Players keep track of cash transactions on a sheet of paper.
Wine Tiles - In the unlikely event that the common supply runs out of Tiles of a certain value, Players can use several Tiles that add up to the
appropriate total value (if that is not possible, Players can use a substitute method of their choice).
All the elements the players have in front of them must always be visible to the other players.

Vineyards
A Player who performs this Action must purchase Vineyards from
at least one region of Portugal, but may not buy more than 1
Vineyard from each region per action.
For each region he chooses, the Player must:

Region
of origin

Cost Side Region Side

Price

Wine color and
Production Value
Characteristic
of Region

Example:

•	 take the topmost Vineyard Tile from its deck,
•	 pay (in cash) the price shown on its Cost side,
•	 place it, with the Region Side face-up, on his Player Board in an empty
Estate slot of his choice.
Only 1 Tile (Vineyard or Winery) can occupy any single Estate Slot. Within
each Estate Vineyards must come from the same region and produce
wines of the same color (White or Red). There are 2 White Vineyards and
2 Red Vineyards for each region, so in each Estate there can be at maximum
2 Vineyards.
If it is the first Vineyard in the Estate, the Player must place 1 of his discs
(from his supply) on the game board in the chosen region’s circle on the
map. The discs are used to quickly see which Players have an Estate in the
region.
If instead it is his second Vineyard in the Estate, he does not place a disc.
There are 4 Estates (each one with 3 Estate slots) on each Player Board,
so a single Player can have a maximum of 4 discs placed on the map.
•	 if possible, place 1 Region Renown Cube (from the common supply) in 1
empty Cube Space of the chosen Region’s Box.
A Player cannot buy 2 Vineyards from the same region in a single Vineyard
action.
There is no limit to the number of Players that may have an Estate (and therefore
a disc) in the same region.
A Player can have more than 1 Estate (and therefore more than 1 disc) in the
same region.
The different characteristics of the regions are described at the end of this rulebook.

Wineries

A Player who performs this Action must build 1 or 2 Wineries.
For each Winery, the Player must:
•	 pay 3,000 Bagos (in cash),
•	 take 1 Winery Tile from the game board,
•	 place it on his Player Board in an empty Estate slot of his choice. Only 1
Tile (Vineyard or Winery) can occupy any single Estate Slot. In each Estate
there can be a maximum of 2 Wineries.
•	 if possible, place 1 Region Renown Cube (from the common supply). If
the Estate already has Vineyards in a Region, the Renown Cube goes on an
empty Cube Space in that Region; otherwise, the cube goes on the Winery
itself until the Estate becomes affiliated with a region.
At that point, move the cube from the Winery to an empty Cube Space in
the Region’s box.

6

Empty Estate Slot

Red already has
Vineyard Tiles in 3
Estates:
1 in Algarve (white
wine), 1 in Dão
(red wine) and 2
in Alentejo (white
wine).
He buys 1 Red
Minho and starts
a new Estate.
He pays 3,000 Bagos cash
and places the Red Minho
Vineyard in his 4th Estate.
He Places 1 Renown
Cube in the Region Box
and 1 of his discs in the
Region’s circle.
He buys 1 Algarve White
and expands his Algarve
Estate.
He Pays 4,000 Bagos cash
and places a Renown Cube
in the Algarve Box. It is
his second Vineyard in the
Estate so he does not place another disc.
He can neither expand his Red Dão Estate (because the Tile
on top of the Dão deck is white), nor the Alentejo Estate
(because he already has the 2 available white Vineyards).

Example:
Blue buys 2 Wineries.
He uses 1 to expand his Douro Estate
and establishes a new Estate with the
other.
He pays a total of 6,000 Bagos (in cash)
and places 1 Region Renown Cube in the
Douro Region Box and 1 Cube on the
Winery in the new Estate.
In a following round he buys 1 Alentejo
Vineyard and places it in the Estate that only has the Winery.
He moves the Cube sitting on the Winery to the Alentejo
Region Box.

Production Value of the Winery
The color of wine produced (red or white) depends
on the color of the Vineyard(s) in the Estate.

Enologists

Production Value of the Enologist

A Player who performs this Action must hire 1 or 2 Enologists.
For each Enologist, the Player must:
•	 pay 1,000 Bagos (in cash),
•	 take 1 Enologist pawn from the game board,
•	 place it on his Player Board on an empty Winery of his choice. Only 1
Enologist can occupy any single Winery.
Each Year, during the Maintenance Step the Player will pay 1,000 Bagos from his
bank account for each Enologist in his employ.

The color of wine produced (red or white)
depends on the color of the Vineyard(s) in the
Estate

Example:
Purple has only
1 empty Winery.
He can thus hire
only 1 Enologist.

Empty Winery

He Pays 1,000 Bagos in cash and places the pawn on the
empty Winery.

Cellars

Example:

A Player who performs this Action must build 1 Cellar:

Yellow had previously produced a “4”
Wine and a “5” Wine
which are still in the
Warehouse of his Alentejo Estate.

The Player must:
•	 pay 2,000 Bagos (in cash),
•	 take 1 Cellar Tile from the game board and
•	 place it on his Player Board to cover a Warehouse of his choice. Only 1
Cellar can cover any single Warehouse.
All the Wine Tiles currently in the Warehouse, if any, must be moved to
the Cellar, respecting their aging.
Therefore, the Wine in the leftmost slot of the Warehouse will be positioned
in the leftmost slot of the Cellar, the Wine in the second Warehouse slot will
go to the second slot of the Cellar.
•	 if possible, place 1 Region Renown Cube (from the common supply).
If the Estate already has Vineyards in a Region, the Renown Cube goes on
an empty Cube Space in that Region; otherwise, the cube goes on the Cellar
itself until the Estate becomes affiliated with a region.
At that point, move the cube from the Cellar to an empty Cube Space in the
Region’s box.
The Cellar allows the wines to age longer. In addition, every year of aging in the Cellar
increases the Value of Wines for Sales, Export, and the Fair.

Now he buys 1 Cellar and places it in his Alentejo Estate,
covering the Warehouse.

He places the “4” Wine
in the leftmost slot of the
Cellar and the “5” Wine
in the second slot.

He places 1 Region Renown Cube in the Alentejo Region
Box.

For better understanding of subsequent actions Players need to know how wine is made and aged, how its value is calculated at the
time of production (Production Value), and at sale, export or Fair time (Wine Value).

The Wine: Aging and Production

Example:

At the end of each year (Production Step), any
Wine Tile still placed in Warehouses or Cellars,
move 1 slot to the right to indicate that they
have aged 1 year.
If a wine moves out of the rightmost slot of its Warehouse/Cellar, it
cannot age any further. The Wine is lost and must be discarded.
After that, current year’s production will start.
For each Estate on his Player Board that has at least 1 Vineyard (if there
are only Wineries or Cellars no wine is produced) the Player must:
a.	 calculate the Production Value (see below),
b.	 take (from the common supply) 1 Wine Tile of the appropriate value
and
c.	 place it on the leftmost slot of the Estate’s Warehouse/Cellar with
the “Red Wine” or the “White Wine” side face-up depending on the
color of the Vineyard Tile(s).

7

The Vintage Tile is -2.

•	In the leftmost slot
of
Blue’s
Lisboa
Warehouse there is a
Wine Tile produced at
the end of the previous
year. He moves it 1 slot to
the right to indicate that
it has aged 1 year.
•	He does not receive a
Wine Tile for his Estate
without Vineyards: an
Estate needs a Vineyard
in order to produce.

Production Value

(continued):

The Production Value of wines depends on several factors: the
weather conditions of the current year (shown on Vintage Tiles), the
number of Vineyards in the Estate and therefore the quantity of grapes produced,
the work of the Enologists to improve the quality of wine, and the presence of
Wineries which provide superb storage for the grapes and host the Enologists.
The Production Value is calculated as follows:
+ 2 points for each Vineyard in the Estate,
+ 1 point for each Winery in the Estate,
+ 2 points for each Enologist in the Estate,
+ or - the Weather conditions Value (+2 to -2), shown in the bottom left
of the current Vintage Tile.
Before production, Enologists can be moved around between your
Estates, provided there are empty Wineries to house them.
Producing a wine of 0 Value equates to not producing, so the Player won’t
receive a Wine Tile.

Wine Value

•	 He does not receive a
Wine Tile for his Minho
Estate.
Production Value is 0:
+2 points for the Vineyard,
-2 points for the Vintage Tile.
Producing a wine of 0 Value equates to not producing.
•	 He receives 1 Wine Tile
for his Lisboa Estate.
Production value is 4:
+2 points for the Vineyard,
+2 points for the 2
Wineries,
+2 points for the Enologist,
-2 points for the Vintage Tile.

up.

When the Wine is sold, exported, or presented at the Fair, its
Value is determined by a combination of its Production Value,
the Region’s Renown, and aging in the Cellar.
The Wine Value is calculated as follow:
Production Value
+ 1, 3, or 5 points for aging if the Wine comes from
a Cellar
+ (optional) 1 or 2 points for Region’s Renown:
If the Player chooses to use any of the Region’s
Renown, he removes 1 or 2 Renown Cubes from
the wine’ region of origin and gains 1 point for each removed cube.
If the Player chooses not to use the Renown gained by the Region, he
neither removes any cubes nor receives any additional points.
Removed Cubes go back to the common supply.
Renown Cubes can be used by any Player with a disc in the Region’s Circle
on the map (regardless of who placed the cubes).

Sales

His Lisboa Vineyard produces Red wine, so the
Wine Tile will be positioned with the Red Side face-

He places the “4” Wine Tile
just produced in the leftmost
slot of the associated
Warehouse.
Example:
Purple has 1 Wine
(Production Value 5) in the
3rd slot of the Cellar in his
Dão Estate.
In the Dão Region there are 4 Renown Cubes. He decides
to use one of them. He
puts the Cube back in the
common supply.
Wine Value is therefore 9:
+ 5 for Production Value,
+ 3 for aging,
+ 1 for the removed Renown Cube.

Example:

A Player who performs this Action must sell 1 or more wines, (from
his Player Board), to 1 or more of the 3 available local hangouts: the
Casa de Fados, the Hotel and/or the Enoteca.
For each wine, the Player must:
a.	 place 1 barrel (from his supply) in the Sales Area in an empty Sale Slot of
his choice. Only 1 barrel can occupy any single Sale Slot. The Wine Value
must be equal to or higher than the requested
“Red Wine”
Sale Slot
value indicated in the Sale Slot. Red wines can
be sold only in “Red Wine” Sale Slots, White
“White Wine”
wines only in “White Wine” Sale Slots. Once
Sale Slot
placed, the barrels cannot be moved.
b.	 remove 1 or 2 Region Renown Cubes as described before, only if he needs
them in order to reach the chosen Sale Slot’s requested value.
Note: the Player cannot remove the Renown Cubes if he does not need to
use them.
c.	 discard the Wine Tile
d.	 advance his Bank Account Marker the number of spaces shown on the
chosen Sale Slot (regardless of the Wine Value) (1 space = 1,000 Bagos).
If his Bank Account Marker reaches the “24” space, a Player cannot receive
further Bagos.

8

Blue decides to sell the
Red Wine (Production
Value 6) in the 2nd slot of
his Setúbal Cellar.
In the Setúbal Region, there are 2 Renown Cubes, but he
decides to use no Cubes.
Wine Value is therefore 7:
+ 6 for the production value,
+ 1 for aging.
He can place the barrel in any “Red
Wine” Sale Slot with a value of 7 or
lower.
In a previous Sales Action he had
placed 1 barrel in the Hotel Area,
selling a White Wine with Wine
Value of 6.
Now he places another barrel in
the Hotel Area in the 7 Red Slot.
He advances his Bank Account
Marker by 7 spaces.

take back the barrels from 1 local hangout
As many time as he wants, before performing an
Action or before the Fair Step, a Player can take back 2
of his barrels that are in the same local hangout.
For each 2 barrels taken, he must place 2 Renown cubes in 2 different
Regions of his choice, if possible.
Because the barrels are returned to the Player’s supply, he can reuse them,
even immediately, for Sales, for Export or for Managers.
He can neither take back a single barrel nor 2 barrels from 2 different
hangouts.

Export
A Player who performs this Action must export 1 or more wines,
(from his Player Board), to 1 or more of the foreign markets (each
column represents a different market).
For each wine, the Player must:
a.	 place 1 barrel (from his supply) in the Export Area in an empty Export Slot
of his choice. Only 1 barrel can occupy any single Export Slot. The Wine
Value must be equal to or higher than the requested value, indicated in the
Export Slot. Once placed, the barrels cannot be taken back nor moved.
b.	 remove 1 or 2 Region Renown Cubes as described before, only if he needs
them in order to reach the chosen Export Slot’s requested value.
Note: the Player cannot remove the Renown Cubes if he does not need to use
them.
c.	 discard the Wine Tile.
He immediately receives as many Victory Points (from now on, VP)
as shown alongside the row where he placed the barrel (regardless of
the Wine Value and the Value of the occupied Export Slot).
At the end of the game, evaluate each column to see who is the largest
exporter to that foreign market. The Player with the most barrels in that
column will earn the VP indicated above the column. In case of a tie, the
points will be split (rounded down) by tied Players.

Bank

Example:
Purple decides to take
back 2 barrels from the Hotel
Area and 2 barrels from the
Enoteca Area. He cannot take
back the single barrel remaining in the Enoteca Area.
He must place 4 cubes (in at least 2 different regions). He
immediately uses them to perform his Sales Action.
He then sells his Red Douro Wine (Wine value 3) placing
1 barrel in the 3 Sale Slot in the Casa de Fados Area. He
also sells his White Lisboa Wine (Wine Value 12) placing 1
barrel in the 10 Sale Slot in the Enoteca Area.
He advances his Bank Account Marker 13 Spaces.

Example: Purple has no barrels in front of
him. He needs 1 barrel to perform the Export
Action. He has 2 barrels in the Casa de Fados.
He decides to take them back. He uses 1 of them
immediately. He places 2 Cubes in 2 different
regions of his choice.
He exports the wine (Production
Value 7) in the second slot of his
Dão Warehouse.
If he wants to place the barrel in the 8 or in the 9 Export
Slot, he must remove 1 or 2 Cubes from the Dão Region Box,
(no points for aging because the
wine wasn’t on a cellar).
If instead he would like to place
it in the 7 or in the 6 Export Slot,
he doesn’t have the option to
remove a cube from Dão, because
he doesn’t need it.
He chooses to place the barrel
in the 7 Export Slot in the 1st
column and immediately receives
Empty Export Slot
5 VP.
At the end of the game: Purple receives 6 VP for the 1st
column. Blue receives 8 VP for the 2nd column. Blue,
Yellow and Red receive 3 VP each for the 3rd column.
Purple receives 12 VP for 4th column.

Example:

A Player who visits the Bank must take 1 or more of the following
Actions as many times as he wants and in any order:
•	 Withdrawing cash from his Bank account:
The Player moves his Bank Account Marker back 1 or more spaces and receives
the corresponding amount in cash from the common supply
(1 space = 1,000 Bagos).
If his Bank Account Marker reaches this space, the Player immediately
loses 2 VP and cannot withdraw further.
•	 Depositing cash to his Bank account:
The Player moves his Bank Account Marker forward 1 or more spaces and pays
the corresponding amount of cash to the common supply (1 space = 1,000 Bagos). If his Account Marker reaches the “24” space, the Player cannot deposit
further.

Yellow withdraws 3,000
Bagos from his Bank Account. He
moves his Bank Account Marker
back 3 spaces (from “14” to “11”)
and takes 3,000 Bagos cash from
the
common
supply.
He then invests.
He moves his Investment Marker up 1 space
(from “-1” to “0”). He moves his Bank Account
Marker back 3 spaces (from “11” to “8”).
He makes another investment and moves his
Investment Marker up 1 space (from “0” to
“+1”). He moves his Bank Account Marker back
2 spaces (from “8” to “6”).
Red deposits
5,000 Bagos. He moves
his Bank Account Marker
forward 5 spaces (from “19”
to “24”) and puts 5,000 cash
in the common supply.

•	 Investing:
For each investment, the Player moves his Investment Marker up
1 space. The cost (to be paid from his bank account) for the movement is indicated to the right of the Investment bar. The Player
moves his Bank Account Marker back accordingly.
If his Investment Marker reaches the “+3” space, the Player cannot
invest further.

9

divesting
At any time during the game, the Player is allowed to divest
(as many times as he wants).
For each divestment, the Player moves his Investment Marker
down 1 space, and receives the amount of Bagos indicated to
the left of the Investments Bar in cash from the common supply.
If his Investment Marker reaches the “-2” space, the Player cannot divest
further.
The Player does not move his Bank Account Marker.
During the Maintenance Step each Player will receive or pay interest according to the
position of his Investment Marker. Note: Players cannot use their cash Bagos to pay
negative interest.
At the end of the game, the Player will receive as many VP as shown
alongside the row where his Bank Account Marker sits.

Wine Experts
A Player who performs this Action must hire 1 or 2 Wine Experts.
For each Wine Expert, the Player must:
a.	 choose a deck,
b.	 take the Tile on the top from it,
c.	 pay 1,000 Bagos (in cash) and
d.	 place the Tile in front of himself, face-up.

Example:
It is Blue’s turn. He would like to move his
Action Marker to a non-adjacent space in
order to perform the Vineyard Action. He
doesn’t have enough Bagos cash in front of him.
He divests 4 times: he moves his Investment
Marker down 4 spaces (from “+3” to “-1”). He
receives 11,000 Bagos cash from the common
supply. He can now move
his Action Marker to take the Vineyard
Action.
At the end of the game:
Red receives 18 VP,
Yellow receives 3 VP,
Blue and Purple do not
receive any VP.

Example:
Purple purchases the “Taste”
Expert Tile from the top of the
deck.
He pays 1,000 Bagos and places
the Tile face-up in front of him.
Now he decides to buy a second
Tile from the same deck.

The Player buys the first Tile and then decides whether or not to buy another Tile
from the same or another deck.

He takes a second “Taste”
Expert Tile from the top of
the deck, pays 1,000 Bagos
cash and places it face-up in
front of him.

Each Tile represents 1 Wine Expert, who specializes in one Wine feature (Taste, Aroma, Look, Alcohol Content).
During the Fair Step, the Player could play a number of Wine Experts to promote
his wine and gain Fair Points.
The higher the Value of the presented wine, the higher the number of Tiles he can
play. After the Fair, the Player will discard all the played Tiles.

the abilities of the wine experts
Each Wine Expert also has additional abilities.
During his turn the Player can play 1 or more Wine Experts by exploiting
the ability depicted on the upper portion of the Tile.
The description of the abilities and when the Player can play each Tile can be
found at the end of this rulebook.
If the Player decides to use the ability, he cannot play the Wine Expert at
the following Fair Step. He must then turn the Tile in front of him facedown, to indicate that it has already been used.
At the beginning of 4 and 6 year, the Tiles face-down in front of the Player
will be turned face up. He can then use the Tiles again (exploiting the
ability again or playing the Wine Expert at the following Wine Tasting
Step).
th

th

A Player cannot have more than 6 Wine Expert Tiles in front of him. If a
Player has already 6 Tiles, and purchases others, he must discard excess Tiles
of his choice among the face-up and the face-down tiles in front of him. He
puts the discarded Tiles at the bottom of the appropriate decks. Purchased
Tiles are always placed face-up in front of the Player.

10

Example:
2nd Year (Taking Action Step): Purple has 5 Wine
Expert Tiles in front of him.
(4 face-up and 1 face-down as he has
already used one’s ability). He is performing
the Export Action and uses the ability of 1
of his Wine Experts. He turns the Expert
Tile face-down. Now he has 3 face-up Tiles
and 2 face-down Tiles
3rd Year (Taking Action Step): he performs the Wine
Experts Action and buys 2 Tiles. He cannot have more than
6 Tiles in front of him, so he must discard 1.
He discards one of the face-down Tiles. He places the new
Tiles face-up in front of himself. Now he has 5 face-up Tiles
and 1 face-down Tile in front of him.
3rd Year (Fair Step): he cannot play the face-down Tile.
He plays 3 of his face-up Tiles. After the Fair, he discards
them. Now he has 2 face-up
Tiles and 1 face-down Tile.
4th Year: he turns face-up the
Tile that is face-down in front
of him.

Pass/Press Release
When he places his Action Marker on the Pass/Press Release space,
the Player, first of all, must move his Order Marker from the top row
to the bottom row of the “Player Order” Area and place it in the empty
Order Slot of his choice (only 1 Order Marker may occupy any single Order Slot).
After that, the Player either:
1.	 does nothing (Pass) (if he does not want to, or cannot, perform the Press
Release Action),
OR
2.	 performs the Press Release Action (he issues a press release to announce
the wine he will present at the following Fair).
If he chooses to perform the Press Release Action, the Player:

Example: 4th Year, Phase 1
(Taking Action Step)
Red moves his Action Marker
to the Pass/ Press Release
Space.
He moves his Order Marker to
the bottom row of the Player Order Area and places it in the
first Order Slot.
He decides to perform the Press Release Action.
He declares that at the 2nd
Fair (that will be held at
the end of the 5th Year), he
will present the Red Wine
(Production Value 5) in the
4th Slot of his Douro cellar.

a.	 must declare which wine, among the ones on his Player Board, he will present at the Fair.

He uses 2 Region Renown
Cubes. He removes the cubes from the Douro Region Box
and puts them back in the common supply.

b.	 determines, per the table below, the maximum number of Wine Expert
Tiles (from 0 to 4) that he could play during the following Fair Step, and picks
(from his supply) the Fair Tile of the appropriate value.
If the Wine Value is more than 9 (i.e. 10 or higher), the Player receives 1
Fair Point for each Wine Value Point it is beyond 9. So, if the Wine Value is
10, the Player receives 1 Fair Point; if it is 11, he receives 2 Fair Points; if 12,
3 Fair Points and so on. He advances his Fair Scoring Marker accordingly.

Wine Value is then 12: + 5 for Production Value, + 5 for
aging, + 2 for the removed Renown Cubes.
He can therefore play up to 4 Wine Expert Tiles at the
following Fair Step.
He takes the number 4 Fair Tile from his supply.

Wine Value
Wine Expert Tiles

c.	 must place his Fair Tile, with the appropriate side face-up, in an empty
Fair Slot of his choice. Only 1 Fair Tile can occupy any single Fair Slot.
Once placed, the Fair Tile can neither be moved nor taken back until the following
Fair ends.

He receives 3 Fair Points because the Wine Value is
12
(3 Wine Value Point above 9) and moves his Fair Scoring
Marker accordingly (from 14 to 17).
He places his Fair Tile on the Look/Taste Fair Slot (with the
number 4 face-up).
The Taste Marker is in the “2” section, The Look Marker is
in the “4” section. The Player receives: 6 Fair Points for the
features (moves his Fair Scoring Marker accordingly from 17
to 23) and 3,000 Bagos in cash for the depicted Bonus.

Empty Fair Slot

2 features and 1 bonus are depicted on each Fair Slot.
The Player immediately receives the following, depending on the occupied
Fair Slot:
▶▶ for each depicted feature, the Fair Points indicated at the top of that
Feature’s Marker current section (0-5). He advances his Fair Scoring
Marker accordingly.
▶▶ the depicted bonus: 3,000 Bagos (in cash, from the common supply)
or 1 Wine Expert Tile (taken from the top of a deck of his choice) or 2
additional Fair Points.
Note: the Fair Points gained by the Players will never reset to zero.
d.	 (optional) place 1 or 2 of his barrels (from his own supply)
in the Managers Area.
For each Manager (Alexandre, Beatriz and Constantino) the
Player must:
1.	 check whether the wine he plans to present satisfies that
Manager’s request for the current year (indicated on the
current Vintage Tile: Alexandre’s request is indicated in the
square with the letter A, Beatriz’s in the square with the letter
B, and Constantino’s in the square with the letter C).
Alexandre is interested in wines with a certain color, Beatriz in wines with at least a certain value and Constantino in
wines that are from certain regions.

The requests of the Managers are as follow:
Alexandre requests a White Wine
Beatriz requests a wine valued at least 9
Constantino requests a wine from region
1 (Minho), 3 (Dão), 4 (Douro) or 7
(Setúbal).

Managers
Area

2.	 if the request is satisfied, decide if he wants to place 1 of his barrels
(from his supply) in that Manager’s space.

11

The wine Red plans to
present (Red Wine from Douro. Wine Value
12) satisfies Beatriz’ and Constantino’s
requests.
He can therefore place 1 barrel on the Beatriz
space and 1 barrel on the Constantino space.
He decides to place a barrel only on Beatriz.
He then discards the Wine Tile.

A single Press Release action allows the Player to place up to 2 barrels (on
2 different Manager spaces), so, even if the wine satisfies all 3 Manager’s
requests, the Player may place a maximum of 2 barrels on 2 different Manager
spaces of his choice.
There is no limit to the number of barrels (of the same Player or multiple Players) that may simultaneously be present on the same Manager space. Players
can also decide not to place any barrels whatsoever.
Players cannot place any barrels during the 1st Year.
Note: The Player must present 1 wine, and only 1 wine, at each Fair (so 3
wines in total during the game). He can thus place barrels in the Manager Area
3 times during the game. Once placed, the barrels cannot be taken back; however,
they could be moved following the rules described below.
e.	 remove 1 or 2 Region Renown Cubes as described before, only if he needs
them to increase the Wine Value in order to play more Wine Expert Tiles, to
gain Fair Points if the Wine Value is more than 9 or to satisfy Beatriz’ request.
Note: the Player cannot remove the Renown Cubes if he does not need to use
them.
f.	 discard the Wine Tile
Note: If the Player places his Action Marker in the Pass/Press Release space and 1 of
his Fair Tiles is already placed in the Fair Area, he is then compelled to pass.
Note: At the beginning of the Fair Step, all the Players that haven’t done so yet will
declare which wine they are presenting. After the Fair Step, Players will take back their
Fair Tiles.

the benefits
During the Taking Actions Step,
immediately before or after moving his
Action Marker and/or performing the
Action, the Player, can decide to give 1
of his wines to a Manager with whom
he has a relationship established. This allows the Player to move 1 of his
barrels in that Manager’s row, and get a benefit (a Multiplier or Bonus
Action).
Note: moving the Action Marker and performing the Action is mandatory.
In order to do this, the Player must:
a.	 discard 1 wine of his choice (regardless of its value, color, and region
of origin) from his Player Board,
b.	 move 1 of his barrels from a Manager space or a Bonus Action space
(barrels placed on Multiplier spaces cannot be moved) and
c.	 staying in the same row, place it in:
•	a Bonus Action Space. The Player must immediately perform the action
depicted, paying any associated costs.
There is no limit to the number of barrels (of the same or multiple Players)
that can simultaneously be present on the same Bonus Action space.
The same barrel can be moved again during a subsequent turn, following
the same rules: discard 1 wine, move 1 barrel, get 1 benefit.
Note: the barrel must move to a different space.
OR
•	 a Multiplier Space. The Player places the barrel in any empty Multiplier
Slot. Only 1 barrel can occupy any single Multiplier Slot. A single Player
may not have more than 1 barrel on the same Multiplier space. Once it’s
placed in a Multiplier space, a barrel cannot be moved.

5th Year, Phase 2 (Taking Actions Step):
Red moves his Action Marker to the Pass/Press Release
space again. He has already declared which wine he will
present, so he is compelled to pass, which means he cannot
put additional barrels in the Manager Area.
Example: 4th Year, Phase 1 (Taking Actions Step)
Blue is performing the Press Release
Action.
He declares that the wine
he will present at the 2nd
Fair (that will be held at
the end of 5th Year) is his
Minho White Wine valued 9.
The wine satisfies all the requests indicated on
the Year Tile.
He can place 2 barrels in 2 different Manager
spaces of his choice.
He had already placed 1 barrel in Alexandre’s
space during the 3rd Year when he declared
the wine for the 1st Fair.
He decides to place 1 barrel on Alexandre’s
space and 1 barrel on Beatriz’ space. He discards the Wine
Tile he announced.
He can now immediately discard 1 wine of his choice in order
to move 1 barrel and obtain 1 benefit. He can move any 1 of
his 3 barrels. He discards 1 wine of his choice and moves 1
barrel from Alexandre’s space to the “Sales Bonus Action”
space. He performs the “Sales” Bonus Action.

Bonus Action
spaces

Multiplier spaces

4th Year, Phase 2 (Taking Actions Step)
Blue is performing the Enologists Action. He discards 1
wine of his choice and moves 1 barrel from the “Sales Bonus
Action” space to the “Winery Bonus Action” space. He
performs the “Winery” Bonus Action and then the Enologist
Action.

5th Year, Phase 1 (Taking Actions Step)
Blue is performing the Vineyards Action. He discards 1
wine of his choice and moves 1 barrel from Beatriz’ space
to Cash Multiplier. At the end of the game he will receive the
indicated VP. Then he performs the Vineyard Action. The
barrel cannot be moved further.

The Player receives VP
immediately or
at the end of the game.
The Player cannot move the barrels during other Steps: Start of Round,
Maintenance, Production and Fair.
During each Phase of the Taking Actions Step, the Player can move only 1
barrel and therefore obtain only 1 benefit.
The descriptions of Bonus Actions and Multipliers can be found at the end of this rulebook.

12

5th Year, Phase 2 (Taking Actions Step)
Blue is performing the Cellars Action. He discards 1 wine
of his choice and moves 1 barrel from the “Winery Bonus
Action” Space to Wine Multiplier. He immediately receives
the indicated VP. Then he performs the Cellars Action. The
barrel cannot be moved further.

Maintenance
Place the Round/Taxation Marker on the
appropriate space of the current year, to indicate
that the Maintenance Step is starting.
Using his Bank Account at Banco do Vinho, each
Player must:
a.	 receive or pay interest according to his Investments.
He moves his Bank Account Marker forward or backward as indicated by the
space on which his Investment Marker sits.
If he cannot pay the interest, the Player, after paying all he can, must discard a
Winery from his Player Board. If he does not have a Winery, he must discard
a Vineyard of his choice.
b.	 pay the salary of each of his Enologists, if any.
He moves his Bank Account Marker backward a number of spaces equal to the
number of Enologists that are present on his Player Board.
If he cannot pay, he must fire the Enologists whom he failed to pay. He puts all
the fired Enologists in the appropriate space on the game board.
Note: The Player can never fire Enologists if he has sufficient funds in his Bank
account to pay their salaries.
In both cases, as soon his Account Marker reaches the “-2” space, the Player
immediately loses 2 VP and cannot pay further. If the Account Marker is
already placed in this space, the Player does not lose VP again.
Note: Players can neither use their cash Bagos to pay interest or salaries, nor can they
receive positive interest in cash.

Example:
Purple‘s Investment Marker is in the “+1”
space. He moves his Bank Account Marker
forward 1 space.
Blue‘s Investment
Marker is in the
“0” space. He does
not move his Bank
Account Marker.
Red‘s Investment
Marker is in the “-2” space.
He cannot pay all the interest.
He moves his Bank Account
Marker backward 1 space. He loses 2 VP and must discard 1
Winery from his Player Board.
Blue has 3 Enologists on his Player Board.
He can pay only 2 of them. He moves
his Bank Account Marker backward
2 spaces. He loses 2 VP and must
discard 1 Enologist of his choice from
his Player Board.
Purple and Red have no
Enologists on their Player Boards,
so they do not move their Account
Markers. Red does not lose VP
again.

Production
Place the Round/Taxation Marker on the
appropriate space of the current year, to
indicate that the Production Step is starting.
As described above, each Player must, first of all, move any Wine Tile still on his
Player Board 1 slot to the right. If there are no more slots available, the Player
is unable to age it further. The Wine is lost and must be discarded.
He then receives 1 Wine Tile for each Estate on his Player Board that has at
least 1 Vineyard and places it on the leftmost slot of the Estate’s Warehouse
or Cellar with the “Red Wine” or the “White Wine” side face-up depending on
the color of the Vineyard Tile. Production Value of the Wine Tile is calculated as
described above (p. 8, Production Value). Before production, Players may move
Enologists between their Estates, provided there are sufficient empty Wineries.
Producing a wine of 0 Value equates to not producing, so the Player won’t receive
a Wine Tile.
If this is the 1st, 2nd, or 4th year, the year ends.
If this is the 3rd, 5th, or 6th year, the Fair Step will be held. Then, the year ends.

Example:
Purple moves all the
Wine Tiles on his Player
Board 1 slot to the right.
He must discard the Wine Tile (Production Value 3) placed
in the second slot of the warehouse in his Algarve Estate
because he is unable to age it further.
He moves 1 Enologist from the Winery in his Minho Estate
to the empty Winery in his Algarve Estate.
Then, he calculates the Production Value of the wines
produced in his Estates, receives the appropriate Wine Tiles
and places them in the leftmost slot of the warehouses.

Wine Tasting Fair (only 3 rd, 5 th and 6 th Year)
Place the Round/Taxation Marker on the
appropriate space of the current year, to indicate
that the Fair Step is starting.
Players are compelled to present 1 wine at each Fair, if they can.
Anyone who has at least 1 Wine Tile on his Player Board and hasn’t yet placed
a Fair Tile in the Fair Area by making a Press Release must now do so, in Player
Order, as described above (Pass/Press Release action):
declare which wine they will present, decide if they want to use the renown of
the region, determine the maximum number of Wine Expert Tiles they can play,
place their Fair Tile, receiving the appropriate Fair Points and Bonus, optionally
place 1 or 2 barrels in the Managers Area, and finally discard the Wine Tile.
Players that are unable to present a Wine, won’t place their Fair Tiles and won’t
participate in the Fair.
After that, the Fair starts.
Each Player must:
a.	 pick up any face-up Wine Expert Tiles he has, into his hand,
b.	 secretly decide if, how many, and which he wants to play, respecting the following rules:

13

Example: 5th Year, Fair Step.
Blue is the only one who has not placed his Fair Tile in the
Fair Area.
He now declares that he will present
his Terras do Sado white Wine
(Wine Value 4).
He can play up to 1 Wine Expert
Tile.
He places his Fair Tile
(with number 1 face up) in the Look/Alcohol
Content Fair Slot. He receives the Fair Points
for the features and 2 Fair Points for the Fair
Slot’s Bonus.
The wine satisfies Constantino’s request, so
he places 1 of his barrels on the Constantino
space. Because it is not the Taking Action Step,
he is not allowed to move 1 of the barrels right
now. The 2nd Fair starts.

▶▶ the maximum number of Wine Expert Tiles a Player can play is
indicated by the Fair Tile he placed in the Fair Area. He can decide to
play no Tiles.
▶▶ which kind of Wine Experts (i.e. in which features they must be
specialized) a Player can play is indicated on his chosen Fair Slot.
Example: the chosen Fair Slot depicts Look and Taste, so the Player can play
only Look and/or Taste Wine Experts.
c.	 place the Tiles he decided to play on the table in front of himself covering all
his Tiles with his hands so that other Players cannot see which and how many
Tiles he has played.
After that, all Players turn the played Tiles face-up simultaneously.
First of all, for each “Move Feature” symbol (the ones with an arrow) on the
played Tiles, if any, move the appropriate Feature Marker 1 space to the right.
Then, each played Wine Expert earns the person who played it the Fair Points
depicted at the top of that Feature’s Marker current section (0-5) The Player
advances his Fair Scoring Marker accordingly.
Now determine the ranking according to the number of Fair Points accumulated
so far by each Player.
The top 3 Players on the Fair Scoring Track immediately gain VP according to the
table below:

1st Fair
(3rd Year)

2nd Fair
(5th Year)

3rd Fair
(6th Year)

Blue has 5 Wine Expert Tiles
in front of him, all face-down. He
cannot play any Tiles.

Purple has 3 Wine Expert Tiles
face-up and 1 face-down.
His Fair Tile indicates that he can play
a maximum of 3 Wine Expert Tiles.
Because it is placed in the Look/Taste
Space, he can play only Look and/or
Taste Experts.
Red only has 1 Taste Expert Tile
face-up.
Because he placed his Fair Tile on a
Slot that restricts him to play only
Look and/or Aroma Experts, he can’t
play any Tiles.
Yellow has 6 Wine Expert Tiles in
front of him, all face-up. His Fair Tile
indicates that he can play up to 4 Taste
and/or Aroma Experts.
At the beginning of the Fair,
Blue is 1st in the Fair ranking with 15 Fair Points,
Purple is 2nd with 6 Fair Points,
Red is 3rd with 5 Fair Points and
Yellow is 4th with 4 Fair Points.
Players simultaneously reveal the Tiles they
want to play.
Purple decides to play 2 Taste Expert
Tiles.

The 4th Player gains no VP, but he can choose 1 Expert Tile from the top of any
pile (see below).
In case of a tie, the total amount of VP given by the tied positions will be split
(rounded down) by Players who tied.
Note: the Fair Points gained by the Players will never reset to zero. At end of each
Fair (so, 3 times during the game) Players will gain VP depending on the ranking determined by the Fair Points they accumulated up to that moment.
Note: If a player is unable to present a wine, he does not gain Victory Points, regardless
of where he is in the Fair Points ranking. He also will not receive a Wine Expert Tile
if he is in 4th place.
End of fair operations:
a.	 All Players discard the played Wine Expert Tiles and put them at bottom of
the appropriate decks.
b.	 If it is a 4-Player game, the Player in last place on the Fair Scoring Track
takes a free Wine Expert Tile from the top of the deck of his choice and places it face-up in front of him. (If it is a 2- or a 3-Player game, the Player in last
place on the Fair Scoring Track doesn’t get a free Expert Tile).
If he has already 6 Wine Expert Tiles in front of him, he must choose whether
or not to take the free Tile. If he decides to take it, he must discard 1 of the
Tiles he has in front of him (either face-up or face-down) and put it at the bottom of the appropriate deck.
In case of a tie for last place, all the Players who tied take 1 Tile.
c.	 Each Player takes back his Fair Tile from the game board and places it in his
supply.
d.	 Adjust the order of play. The Player in last place on the Fair Scoring
Track becomes First Player, second-to-last will play second and so on.
In case of a tie, the order between the tied Players doesn’t change.
Example:
Blue has 35 Fair Points, Purple has 26 Fair Points, both Red and Yellow have
20 Fair Points.
It is the 3rd Fair, so Blue gains 15 VP, Purple gains 10 VP, Red and Yellow gain
2 VP each (5+0)/2.
All Players discard the played Wine Expert Tiles. Red and Yellow tied for last, so
they take 1 Wine Expert Tile each.
At the beginning of the Fair, Blue was First Player, Red was 2nd, Purple was 3rd
and Yellow was 4th.
The positions on the Fair Scoring Track are: Blue 1st, Purple 2nd, Red and Yellow tied for last. The new Order of play is: Red Yellow Purple Blue.

14

Yellow decides to
play 3 Aroma and 1
Taste Expert Tiles.
Blue and Red do not play any Tiles.
There are 2 Move Taste and 1 Move Aroma, so the Taste Marker
moves right 2 spaces, and the Aroma Marker moves right 1 space.
The Taste Marker is now in section “4” and the Aroma Marker
in section “3”.

Purple gains 8 Fair Points and Yellow gains 13 Fair
Points.
So, the ranking determined by the Fair Points accumulated so
far is:
Yellow is 1st in the ranking with 17 Fair Points,
Blue is 2nd with 15 Fair Points,
Purple is 3rd with 14 Fair Points and
Red is 4th with 5 Fair Points.
It is the 2nd Fair (5th Year), so Yellow gains 12 VP, Blue
gains 8 VP, Purple gains 4 VP, Red gains no VP.
Purple and Yellow discard the
played Tiles.
Red picks 1 Wine Expert Tile. He
chooses the Look deck.
The new Order of play is:
Red, Purple, Blue, Yellow

End of the game
After the 3rd Fair (i.e. at the end of 6th Year), using the same rules as described above, each Player in turn order may discard 1 wine from his
Player Board in order to move 1 of his barrels from a Bonus Action space or a Manager space to a different space in the same row, receiving
the benefit indicated. Remember that barrels already on Multiplier Spaces are not allowed to move.
Continue, in turn order, until all Players pass. Once a Player passes, he can’t choose to jump back in later.
Players can use the abilities of their face-up Wine Experts.
The game then ends.
Players receive VP for:
•	 Majorities in columns of the foreign markets (see Export Action)
•	 The balance of their Bank Account (see Bank Action)
•	 Some Multipliers (See below, Multipliers)
The winner is the Player with most VP.
In case of ties, the Player with the highest number of barrels in the Export Area is the winner. In case of further ties, the Player with the highest
amount of money (cash and bank) is the winner (Players can divest).

Wine Experts Abilities
This Tile can be used during the Vineyard Action (cannot
be used during the Bonus Vineyard Action). It allows
the Player to obtain a discount of 1,000 Bagos off each
Vineyard purchased.

This Tile can be used at any time during the game. It allows
the Player to immediately receive 2,000 Bagos (in cash)
from the common supply.

This Tile can be used during the Vineyard Action (cannot
be used during the Bonus Vineyard Action). It allows the
Player to reorganize the Vineyard Tile deck in a single
Region before buying the Vineyard.

This Tile can be used before performing an Action, before
performing a Bonus Action or before the Fair Step. It
allows the Player to place 1 Region Renown Cube in 1
region of his choice.

This Tile can be used before performing an Action, before
performing a Bonus Action or before the Fair Step. It allows
the Player to take back 1 of his barrels from the Export,
Sales, Benefits or Managers Areas.
The barrel is returned to the Player’s supply, allowing him
to reuse it, even immediately.

This Tile can be used before moving the Action Marker. It
allows the Player to move his Action Marker free of charge
(i.e. paying neither for moving to a non-adjacent space,
nor for taxes, nor for other Players who are already in the
target space).

Multipliers

At the end of the game, the Player receives VP for each
Cellar on his Player Board:
4 if his barrel is in the left space, 2 if it is in the right space.

The Player discards 1 wine of his choice (from his Player
Board) and immediately receives VP equal to its value
(production value+aging+(optional) removed Renown
cubes).

At the end of the game, the Player receives VP for each
Enologist on his Player Board:
4 if his barrel is in the left space, 2 if it is in the right space.

The Player immediately receives 8 VP if he currently has,
face-up in front of him, Wine Experts specialized in each of
the 4 wine features.

At the end of the game, the Player receives VP for each
complete Estate (i.e. all 3 slots are filled by a Vineyards
and/or Wineries) on his Player Board:
4 if his barrel is in the left space, 2 if it is in the right space.

The Player immediately receives 1 VP for each Renown
Cube currently placed in the regions where he has at least
1 of his discs.

Note: Players can occupy a Multiplier Slot even if they do not satisfy
the indicated condition. In this case, they do not receive any VP.

At the end of the game, the Player receives VP for each
Vineyard on his Player Board:
2 if his barrel is in the left space, 1 if it is in the right space.
At the end of the game, the Player receives VP for cash
Bagos in front of him (Players may divest):
1 per 1,000 Bagos if his barrel is in the left space, 1 per
2,000 Bagos if it is in the right space.
At the end of the game, the Player receives VP for each
Winery on his Player Board:
2 if his barrel is in the left space, 1 if it is in the right space.

15

Bonus Actions

The Player buys 1 Winery for 1,000 Bagos (cash).
He places it on his Player Board following the usual rules.

The Player performs 1 Sales Action (following the usual rules).

The Player buys 1 Vineyard of his choice with a discount
of 2,000 Bagos.
He places it on his Player Board following the usual rules.

The Player performs 1 Export Action (following the usual
rules).
The Player moves his Investment Marker up 1 space for free.

The Player takes a free Wine Expert Tile from the top of a
deck of his choice, and places it face-up in front of himself.

Characteristics of regions
1 Minho: Players cannot build cellars in Minho
Estates.

5 Lisboa: When he places the first Lisboa Vineyard in
an Estate, the Player receives 1 Winery and places it in
that Estate. The Player does not place any additional
Renown Cubes for the winery.
If during the Initial Preparation the Player
chooses Lisboa, he immediately receives 1 Winery and 1 Wine Tile tile
valued 3.

The name Vinhos Verdes (green wines) owes its fame not only
to the exuberant vegetation of a humid region that imparts
a green tone to it, but also to its typically acidic, light flavor,
high alcohol content, and good digestive properties. The best wines are intended to be
drunk within a year.

Lisboa’s diversity of elevation and microclimates enables the region to produce a great
variety of wines. This region’s red wines are aromatic, very elegant, rich in tannins, and
capable of aging for some years. White wines have a fresh and citric character. Formally
known as Estremadura, this region had high investments made by the government to
modernize the area.

2 Trás-os-montes: The Player receives 2 additional
Fair Points if he presents a Trás-os-montes wine at
the Fair.

The region’s name means “behind the hills”, which accurately
describes its location at the far north east of Portugal. The
region produces red wines that are usually fruity and slightly
astringent, as well as white wines that are soft, with a floral bouquet. The vines that
grow in this region are ancient. These wines are known for their great quality, and are
in high demand at the fairs.

6 Alentejo: Each Region Renown Cube is worth 2
instead of 1. As usual, Players can take 1 or 2 Cubes
from Alentejo, which in this case allows them to add
2 or 4 Points to the Wine Value.

This hot and arid region is made up of wide plains producing White wines that are
usually soft, slightly acidic, with tropical fruit aromas. Red wines are rich in tannins,
full-bodied, with strong aromas of wild, red fruit. Alentejo has benefited from
numerous investments in the wine sector, which enabled the region to produce the best
Portuguese wines and, therefore, gain international recognition.

3 Dão: When he places the first Dão Vineyard in an
Estate, the Player receives 1 cellar and places it to
cover that Estate’s warehouse. The Player does not
place any additional Renown Cubes for the cellar.
If during the Initial Preparation the Player
chooses Dão, he immediately receives 1 cellar. He places the wine tile in its
leftmost space.

7 Setúbal: When (during the game or during the
Initial Preparation) he places the first Setúbal
Vineyard in an Estate, the Player takes 2 Wine Expert
Tiles from the top of 1 or 2 decks of his choice and
places them face-up in front of him.

Soils bearing many pine trees and much corn characterize the Dão region, which is
surrounded by mountain ranges that protect it from wind. The wines produced in Dão
have great potential for aging. White wines are very aromatic, fruity, and balanced.
Red wines are full-bodied, aromatic, and may become complex after aging.

Península de Setúbal’s fortified wine, produced from the Moscatel and Moscatel Roxo
grapes, is one of the oldest and most famous wines in the world, greatly recognized by
experts all over the globe.

4 Douro: When he places the first Douro Vineyard
in an Estate, the Player receives 2 Porto Tiles. During
the Production Step, he must choose whether to
produce Douro wine (following the usual rules) or
Porto wine. If he chooses Porto, he adds 3 Points to
the Production Value and discards 1 of his Porto Tiles, placing it back in
the Douro region box.
If during the Initial Preparation the Player chooses Douro, he receives
a wine tile valued 2 and 2 Porto Tiles or a wine tile valued 5 and 1 Porto
Tile depending on his decision to produce Douro or Porto.

8 Algarve: The Player always adds 1 Point while
calculating the Wine Value.

Due to tourism encroaching on many of the agricultural
lands, wine production in Algarve has decreased. Located in
the south of Portugal, Algarve has a very specific climate: it is
near the sea, but also suffers the influence of a mountain, and
it produces soft and very fruity wines. Currently, there is renewed interest in growing
new vines in the region, and great investments are being made in the sector.

Porto is the wine that immediately characterizes the Douro region. Made in poor soils
on steep slopes bathed by the river Douro, Porto is the ambassador of Portuguese
wines. To maintain the wine unaltered during journeys, they started adding spirits
to it. With this addition, the fermentation process stopped, making the wine sweeter.

NOTE: The second Vineyard in an Estate never doubles any of the
bonuses listed above.

Author: Vital Lacerda
Artwork: Mariano Iannelli

Without you all this game could never happen. I hope you love it as I do.
Vital

The Author wishes to warmly thank Sandra Sarmento, Bruno Valério, Alexandre Bezerra,
Alison Roberts, Ricardo Gama, Helena Pereira, João Tereso, Gonçalo Moura, Vasco Chita,
Carlos Ferreira, João Madeira, Pedro Sampaio, Ruben Rodrigues, Hugo Pinto, Cristina
Barbosa, Tiago Duarte, Sofia Morais, Filipe Nunes, Paulo Inácio, David Dagoma, Baloo,
Rui Barata, Luís Evangelista, Eduardo Cruz, Pedro Silva, João Ribeiro, Paulo Nicholas,
Nuno Sentieiro, Sara Guerreiro, Tiago Nunes, Nuno Lobato, João Palmeira, Paulo Soledade,
Luís Costa, Wade Duym, Lara Morris, Pam Ellis, Jason Conaway, and many others from the
boardgamers groups of Lisboa, Porto, Aveiro and the Columbus Area Boardgaming Society.
Special thanks to: My loving wife Sandra and my two beautiful daughters Inês and
Catarina, for all time I took away from them to design this game, and for their suggestions,
discussions, support, patience and friendship.
To Hélio Andrade, Duarte Conceição, António Vale and Sgrovi, for their unending playtests,
availability, and excellent ideas.
And finally to Nathan Morse, for all the support, for our enjoyable endless conversations on
the web, and most of all, for the new friendship built during this creation process.

Our thanks go also to: Luca Fachini, Francesco Pessina and Giuseppe Ammendola for their
great support, Fabio Cambiaghi, Tinuz & Paoletta, Ciccio Grimaldi, Simone Fantini, Frank
Strauß, Stephan Bittner, Anna Farina, Alberto Vendramini, Andrea Chiarvesio, Pierluca
Zizzi and all other playtesters for their precious suggestions, and to Nathan Morse for the
final rules revision.

Questions, comments, suggestions can be addressed to:
vinhos@whatsyourgame.eu
Web site: www.whatsyourgame.eu
© 2010 What’s Your Game? srl
All rights reserved by What’s Your Game? srl,
Viale Beatrice d’Este 30, 20122, Milano Italy

16

